<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>
      The, by Feodor Sologub
    </title>
<style type="text/css" xml:space="preserve">

    body { margin:5%; background:#faebd0; text-align:justify}
    P { text-indent: 1em; margin-top: .25em; margin-bottom: .25em; }
    H1,H2,H3,H4,H5,H6 { text-align: center; margin-left: 15%; margin-right: 15%; }
    hr  { width: 50%; text-align: center;}
    .foot { margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%; text-align: justify; text-indent: -3em; font-size: 90%; }
    blockquote {font-size: 97%; font-style: italic; margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%;}
    .mynote    {background-color: #DDE; color: #000; padding: .5em; margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%; font-family: sans-serif; font-size: 95%;}
    .toc       { margin-left: 10%; margin-bottom: .75em;}
    .toc2      { margin-left: 20%;}
    div.fig    { display:block; margin:0 auto; text-align:center; }
    div.middle { margin-left: 20%; margin-right: 20%; text-align: justify; }
    .figleft   {float: left; margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 1%;}
    .figright  {float: right; margin-right: 0%; margin-left: 1%;}
    .pagenum   {display:inline; font-size: 70%; font-style:normal;
               margin: 0; padding: 0; position: absolute; right: 1%;
               text-align: right;}
    .side      { float: right; font-size: 75%; width: 25%; padding-left: 0.8em;
               border-left: dashed thin; margin-left: 0.8em; text-align: left;
               text-indent: 0; font-weight: bold; font-style: italic;
               font-weight: bold; color: black; background: #eeeeee; border: solid 1px;}
    pre        { font-style: italic; font-size: 90%; margin-left: 10%;}

</style>
</head>
<body>

<div style="height: 8em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/><br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h1>
      THE CREATED LEGEND
    </h1>
<h2>
      By Feodor Sologub
    </h2>
<h4>
      Authorized Translation from the Russian by John Cournos
    </h4>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
<b>CONTENTS</b>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2H_INTR"> INTRODUCTION </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0001"> CHAPTER I </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0002"> CHAPTER II </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0003"> CHAPTER III </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0004"> CHAPTER IV </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0005"> CHAPTER V </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0006"> CHAPTER VI </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0007"> CHAPTER VII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0008"> CHAPTER VIII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0009"> CHAPTER IX </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0010"> CHAPTER X </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0011"> CHAPTER XI </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0012"> CHAPTER XII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0013"> CHAPTER XIII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0014"> CHAPTER XIV </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0015"> CHAPTER XV </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0016"> CHAPTER XVI </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0017"> CHAPTER XVII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0018"> CHAPTER XVIII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0019"> CHAPTER XIX </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0020"> CHAPTER XX </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0021"> CHAPTER XXI </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0022"> CHAPTER XXII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0023"> CHAPTER XXIII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0024"> CHAPTER XXIV </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0025"> CHAPTER XXV </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0026"> CHAPTER XXVI </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0027"> CHAPTER XXVII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0028"> CHAPTER XXVIII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0029"> CHAPTER XXIX </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0030"> CHAPTER XXX </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0031"> CHAPTER XXXI </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0032"> CHAPTER XXXII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2HCH0033"> CHAPTER XXXIII </a>
</p>
<p class="toc">
<a href="#link2H_FOOT"> FOOTNOTES: </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2H_INTR" name="link2H_INTR"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      INTRODUCTION
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  <i>“For there is nothing either good or
  bad but thinking makes it so.”</i>
  SHAKESPEARE

  <i>“To the impure all things are impure.”</i>
  NIETZSCHE
</pre>
<p>
<i>In “The Little Demon” Sologub has shown us how the evil within us
      peering out through our imagination makes all the world seem evil to us.
      In “The Created Legend,” feeling perhaps the need of reacting from his
      morose creation Peredonov, the author has set himself the task of showing
      the reverse of the picture: how the imagination, no longer warped, but
      sensitized with beauty, is capable of creating a world of its own,
      legendary yet none the less real for the legend.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>The Russian title of the book is more descriptive of the author’s
      intentions than an English translation will permit it to be. “Tvorimaya
      Legenda” actually means “The legend in the course of creation.” The legend
      that Sologub has in mind is the active, eternally changing process of
      life, orderly and structural in spite of the external confusion. The
      author makes an effort to bring order out of apparent chaos by stripping
      life of its complex modern detail and reducing it to a few significant
      symbols, as in a rather more subtle “morality play.” The modern novel is
      perhaps over-psychologized; eternal truths and eternal passions are
      perhaps too often lost sight of under the mass of unnecessary naturalistic
      detail.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>In this novel life passes by the author as a kind of dream, a dream
      within that nightmare Reality, a legend within that amorphousness called
      Life. And the nightmare and the dream, like a sensitive individual’s ideas
      of the world as it is and as it ought to be, alternate here like moods.
      The author has expressed this changeableness of mood curiously by
      alternating a crudely realistic, deliberately naïve, sometimes journalese
      style with an extremely decorative, lyrical manner—this taxing the
      translator to the utmost in view of the urgency to translate the mood as
      well as the ideas.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>As a background we have “the abortive revolution of</i> 1905.” <i>This
      novel is an emotional statement of those “nightmarish” days. Against this
      rather hazy, tempestuous background we have the sharply outlined portrait
      of an individual, a poet, containing a world within himself, a more
      radiant and orderly world than the one which his eyes look upon outwardly.
      It is this “inner vision” which permits him to see the legend in the outer
      chaos, and we read in this book of his efforts to disentangle the thread
      of this legend by the establishment of a kind of Hellenic Utopia.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>It is not alone the poet who is capable of creating his legend, but any
      one who refuses to be subject to the whims of fate and to serve the
      goddess of chance and chaos, “the prodigal scatterer of episodes” (Aisa).
      The tragic thing about this philosophy, as one Russian critic points out,
      is that even the definite settling of the question does not assure one
      complete consolation, for, like Ivan Karamazov in Dostoyevsky’s “Brothers
      Karamazov,” one may say: “I do not accept God, I do not accept the world
      created by Him, God’s world; I simply return Him the ticket most
      respectfully.” Still it is with some such definite decision that he enters
      the kingdom of Ananke, the goddess of Necessity. Readers of “The Little
      Demon” have seen a practical illustration of the two forces in Peredonov
      and Liudmilla. Peredonov was petty and pitiful, “a little demon”—nevertheless
      he too “strove towards the truth in common with all conscious life, and
      this striving tormented him. He himself did not understand that he, like
      all men, was striving towards the truth, and that was why he had that
      confused unrest. He could not find his truth, and he became entangled, and
      was perishing.” Liudmilla, however, had saved herself from the pettiness
      and provinciality of this “unclean, impotent earth” by creating a new
      world for herself. She, at any rate, had her beautiful legend, knew her
      truth. </i>
</p>
<p>
      Elisaveta, of “The Created Legend,” also belongs to the Kingdom of Ananke.
      She finds her salvation in “the dream of liberation,” the dream dreamt by
      all good Russians and made an active creative legend by the efforts to
      realize it in life. Being an antithesis to the analytical novel, this
      novel treats of sex, not as a psychology but as a philosophy; nuances are
      avoided, the feminine figure becomes a symbol, drawn, not photographically
      but broadly, in fluent, even exaggerated Botticellian outlines. I might go
      even further and say that as a symbol of Russian revolution the figure of
      Elisaveta is perhaps meant to stand out with the statuesque boldness of
      the Victory of Samothrace. The feminine figure, nude or thinly draped, has
      been used as symbol for ideas in the plastic arts ever since art was born;
      our puritans have never been faced with the problem of what some of the
      mythological divinities in stone would do if they should suddenly come to
      life, become human. Yet it is a problem of this sort that Sologub has
      attempted to solve—the problem of the gods in exile. As for
      Elisaveta, Sologub goes indeed the length of describing her previous
      existence in the second of the series of novels that go under the general
      head of “The Created Legend”; she was then the Queen Ortruda of some
      beautiful isles in the Mediterranean, and she is fated to carry her
      queenliness into her later life.
    </p>
<p>
<i>“The Little Demon” is Sologub’s “Inferno,” “The Created Legend” his
      “Paradiso.” And just as the problem there was the abuse of bodily beauty,
      so it is here the idealism of bodily beauty. It is natural that the
      over-draping of our bodies, the supposed symbol of our modesty, but in
      reality an evidence of our lust, should form part of his thesis. But M.
      Anatole France has already pointed out brilliantly in “Penguin Island” how
      immodesty originated in the invention of clothes.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>The conclusion is quite clear: it is beauty that can save the world, it
      is our eyes and our imaginations behind our eyes that can remodel the
      world into “a chaste dream.” Like Don Quixote, whom Sologub loves, we must
      see Dulcinea in our Aldonza, and our persistent thought of her as Dulcinea
      may make her Dulcinea in actuality.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Such are the thoughts behind this strange book, in which fantasy and
      reality rub unfriendly shoulders. But it would be robbing the reader of
      his prerogative to explain the various symbols the author employs; for
      this is in the full sense a Symbolist novel, and, like a piece of music or
      a picture in patterns, its charm to him who will like it will lie in
      individual interpretation. I cannot, however, resist the desire to speak
      of my own personal preference for Chapter XIII, in which the death of
      certain musty Russian institutions is brilliantly symbolized by the author
      in the passage of the risen dead on St. John’s Eve</i>.
    </p>
<p>
<i>In the “quiet children” the author has resurrected, as it were, the
      child heroes in which his stories abound, and given them an existence on a
      new plane, “beyond good and evil.” It is only children, beings chaste and
      impressionable, who are capable of transformation—or shall we say
      transfiguration?—and if they happen to be in this case more
      paradisian than earthly it is because truth expressed in symbols must of
      necessity appear fantastic and exaggerated. It is, for the same reason,
      that we find the worthlessness of Matov expressed in his being turned by
      Trirodov into a paper-weight. Then there is the Sun, the Flaming Dragon,
      the infuriator of men’s passions, powerless, however, to affect the “quiet
      children,” who, freed of all passion—“the beast in man”—may
      have their white feet covered with the light dust of the earth, but never
      scorched by the evil heat.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>The various references to the art and ideas of the poet Trirodov and to
      the poet’s tardy recognition are certain to be recognized as
      autobiographical.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>I must add that in the original this first of “Created Legend” novels
      is called “Drops of Blood,” a phrase which recurs several times in the
      course of the narrative in connexion with the problem of cruelty in life.</i>
</p>
<h3>
      JOHN COURNOS
    </h3>
<p>
<i>February</i> 1916
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0001" name="link2HCH0001"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER I
    </h2>
<p>
      I take a piece of life, coarse and poor, and create from it a delightful
      legend—because I am a poet. Whether it linger in the darkness;
      whether it be dim, commonplace, or raging with a furious fire—life
      is before you; I, a poet, will erect the legend I have created about the
      enchanting and the beautiful.
    </p>
<p>
      Chance caught in the entangling net of circumstance brings about every
      beginning. Yet it is better to begin with what is splendid in earthly
      experience, or at any rate with what is beautiful and pleasing. Splendid
      are the body, the youth, and the gaiety in man; splendid are the water,
      the light, and the summer in nature.
    </p>
<p>
      It was a bright, hot midday in summer, and the heavy glances of the
      flaming Dragon fell on the River Skorodyen. The water, the light, and the
      summer beamed and were glad; they beamed because of the sunlight that
      filled the immense space, they were glad because of the wind that blew
      from some far land, because of the many birds, because of the two nude
      maidens.
    </p>
<p>
      Two sisters, Elisaveta and Elena, were bathing in the River Skorodyen. And
      the sun and the water were gay, because the two maidens were beautiful and
      were naked. And the two girls felt also gay and cool, and they wanted to
      scamper and to laugh, to chatter and to jest. They were talking about a
      man who had aroused their curiosity.
    </p>
<p>
      They were the daughters of a rich proprietor. The place where they bathed
      adjoined the spacious old garden of their estate. Perhaps they enjoyed
      their bathing because they felt themselves the mistresses of these
      fast-flowing waters and of the sand-shoals under their agile feet. And
      they swam about and laughed in this river with the assurance and freedom
      of princesses born to rule. Few know the boundaries of their kingdom—but
      fortunate are they who know what they possess and exercise their sway.
    </p>
<p>
      They swam up and down and across the river, and tried to outswim and
      outdive one another. Their bodies, immersed in the water, would have
      presented an entrancing sight to any one who might have looked down upon
      them from the bench in the garden on the high bank and watched the
      exquisite play of their muscles under their thin elastic skin. Pink tones
      lost themselves in the skin-yellow pearl of their bodies. But pink
      triumphed in their faces, and in those parts of the body most often
      exposed.
    </p>
<p>
      The river-bank opposite rose in a slope. There were bushes here; behind
      them for a great distance stretched fields of rye, while just over the
      edge, where the earth and the sky met, were visible the far huts of the
      suburban village. Peasant boys passed by on the bank. They did not look at
      the bathing women. But a schoolboy, who had come a long way from the other
      end of the town, sat on his heels behind the bushes. He called himself an
      ass because he had not brought his camera. But he consoled himself with
      the thought:
    </p>
<p>
      “To-morrow I’ll surely bring it.”
     </p>
<p>
      The schoolboy quickly looked at his watch in order to make a note of the
      time the girls went out bathing. He knew them, and often came to their
      house to see his friend, their relative. Elena, the younger, now appealed
      most to him; she was plump, cheerful, white, rosy, her hands and feet were
      small. He did not like the hands and feet of the elder sister, Elisaveta—they
      seemed to him to be too large and too red. Her face also was red, very
      sunburnt, and she was altogether quite large.
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh well,” he reflected, “she is certainly well formed, you can’t deny her
      that.”
     </p>
<p>
      About a year had now passed since the retired <i>privat-docent</i> Giorgiy
      Sergeyevitch Trirodov, a doctor of chemistry, had settled in the town of
      Skorodozh.<a href="#linknote-1" id="linknoteref-1" name="linknoteref-1"><small>1</small></a>
      From the very first he had caused much talk in the town, mostly
      unsympathetic. It was quite natural that the two rose-yellow, black-haired
      girls in the water should also talk of him. They splashed about gaily, and
      as they raised jewel-like spray with their feet they kept up a
      conversation.
    </p>
<p>
      “How puzzling it all is!” said Elena, the younger sister. “No one knows
      where his income comes from, what he does in his house, and why he has
      this colony of children. There are all sorts of strange rumours about him.
      It’s certainly a mystery.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elena’s words reminded Elisaveta of an article she had read lately in a
      philosophic periodical published at Moscow. Elisaveta had a good memory.
      She recalled a phrase:
    </p>
<p>
      “In our world reason will never dominate, and the mysterious will always
      maintain its place.”
     </p>
<p>
      She tried to recall more, but suddenly realizing that it would not
      interest Elena, she gave a sigh and grew silent. Elena gave her a tender,
      appealing look and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “When it is so bright you want everything to be as clear as it is around
      us now.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Is everything really clear now?” exclaimed Elisaveta. “The sun blinds
      your eyes, the water flashes and dazzles, and in this ragingly bright
      world we do not even know whether there isn’t some one a couple of paces
      away peeping at us.”
     </p>
<p>
      At this moment the sisters were standing breast-high in the water, near
      the overgrown bank. The schoolboy who sat on his heels behind the bush
      heard Elisaveta’s words. He grew cold in his confusion, and began to crawl
      on all-fours between the bushes, away from the river. He got in among the
      rye, then perched himself on the rail-fence and pretended to rest, as
      though he were not even aware of the closeness of the river. But no one
      had noticed him, as if he were non-existent.
    </p>
<p>
      The schoolboy sat there a little while, then went home with a vague
      feeling of disenchantment, injury, and irritation. There was something
      especially humiliating to him in the thought that to the two girl bathers
      he was merely a possibility speculated upon but actually non-existent.
    </p>
<p>
      Everything in this world has an end. There was an end also to the sisters’ 
      bathing. They made their way silently together out of the pleasant, cool,
      deep water towards the dry ground, heaven’s terrestrial footstool, and out
      into the air, where they met the hot kisses of the slowly, cumbrously
      rising Dragon. They stood a while on the bank, yielding themselves to the
      Dragon’s kisses, then entered the protected bath-house where they had left
      their clothes.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta’s clothes were very simple. They consisted of a greenish yellow,
      not over-long tunic-dress without sleeves, and a plain straw hat.
      Elisaveta nearly always wore yellow dresses. She loved yellow, she loved
      buttercups and gold, and though she sometimes said that she wore yellow in
      order to soften her ruddy complexion, she really loved it simply,
      sincerely, and for its own sake. Yellow delighted Elisaveta. There was
      something remote and unpremeditated in this, as if it were a thing
      remembered from another, previous life.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta’s heavy black braid of hair was coiled tightly and attractively
      around her head, and as it was lifted quite high at the back, her neck
      showed—sunburnt and gracefully erect. Elisaveta’s face had a keen,
      almost exaggerated, expression of the mastery of will and intellect over
      the emotions. The long and peculiarly straight parting of her lips was
      very exquisite. Her blue eyes were cheerful—even when her lips did
      not smile. Their glance was thoughtful and gentle. The bright ruddiness
      and strong tan of the face seemed strangely alien to it.
    </p>
<p>
      While waiting for Elena to finish dressing Elisaveta walked slowly on the
      sandy bank and looked into the monotonous distances. The fine warm grains
      of sand gently warmed her bare feet, which had grown cold in the water.
    </p>
<p>
      Elena dressed slowly. She enjoyed dressing; everything that she put on
      seemed an adornment to her. She delighted in the rosy reflections of her
      skin, in her pretty light dress of a pinkish white material, in her broad
      sash of pink silk fastened behind with a buckle of mother-of-pearl, in her
      straw hat trimmed with bright pink ribbons on top and yellow-pink velvet
      on its underbrim.
    </p>
<p>
      At last Elena was dressed. The sisters climbed the sloping bank and went
      where their curiosity drew them. They loved to take long walks. They had
      already passed several times the house and grounds of Giorgiy Trirodov,
      whom they had not yet seen once. To-day they wished to go that way again
      and to try and see what was to be seen.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters walked two versts through the wood. They spoke quietly of
      various things, and felt a little agitated. Curiosity often agitates
      people.
    </p>
<p>
      The sinuous road with two wagon-ruts revealed picturesque views at every
      turn. The path finally chosen by the sisters led to a hollow. Its sides,
      overgrown with bushes and weeds, looked wildly beautiful. From its depth
      came the sweet, warm odour of clover, and down below its white bosom grass
      was visible. A small narrow bridge, propped up from below with thin
      slender stakes, hung over the hollow. On the other side of the bridge a
      low hedge stretched right and left, and in this hedge, quite facing the
      bridge, a small gate was visible.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters crossed the bridge, holding on to its slender hand-rail of
      birch. They tried the gate—it was closed. They looked at one
      another. Elisaveta, growing red with vexation, said:
    </p>
<p>
      “We’ll have to go back again.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Every one says that you can’t get into the place,” said Elena, “that
      you’ve got to get over the hedge, and that even that is impossible for
      some reason or other. It’s very strange. I wonder what they can be up to?”
     </p>
<p>
      Suddenly there was a slight rustle in the bushes by the hedge. The
      branches parted. A pale boy ran up to them. He looked quickly at the
      sisters with his clear, intensely calm, almost dead eyes. There was
      something strange in the shape of his pale lips, thought Elisaveta. A
      motionless, sorrowful expression lurked in the corners of his mouth. He
      opened the gate; he seemed to say something, but so quietly that the
      sisters could not catch his words. Or was it the sound of the light breeze
      in the wavering foliage?
    </p>
<p>
      The boy hid himself behind the bushes so quickly that it was hard to
      believe that he had been there at all; the sisters had no time to be
      astonished or to thank him. It was as if the gate had opened by itself, or
      had been pushed open by one of the sisters by chance.
    </p>
<p>
      They stood there undecided. An incomprehensible unrest took possession of
      them for an instant and as quickly went from them. Curiosity again
      dominated them. The sisters entered.
    </p>
<p>
      “How did he open it?” asked Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta, without a word, went quickly forward. She was so elated at
      getting in that she had almost forgotten the pale boy. Only somewhere,
      within the domain of vague consciousness, there gleamed dimly a strange
      white face.
    </p>
<p>
      The wood was quite like the one by which they had come to the gate, quite
      as pensive and as tall and as isolated from the sky, and as absorbed in
      its own mysteries. But here it seemed to have been conquered by human
      activity. Not far away voices, cries, laughter resounded. Here and there
      were evidences of left-off games. The narrow footpaths often led to wider
      paths of sand. The sisters quickly followed the winding path in the
      direction from which the children’s voices sounded loudest. Afterwards all
      this jumble of sound seemed to collapse, and it renewed itself in loud,
      sweet singing.
    </p>
<p>
      At last there appeared before them a small glade—oval in shape. Tall
      firs edged this open space as evenly as graceful columns in a magnificent
      <i>salle</i>. The blue of the sky above it seemed especially bright, pure
      and dominant. The glade was full of children of various ages. They were
      sitting and reclining all around in ones, twos, and threes. In the middle
      some thirty boys and girls were singing and dancing; their dance followed
      strictly the rhythm of the tune and interpreted the words of the song with
      beautiful fidelity. They were directed by a tall, graceful girl who had a
      strong, sonorous voice, braids of magnificent golden hair, and grey,
      cheerful eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      All of them, the children as well as their instructresses—of whom
      three or four were to be seen—were dressed quite simply and alike.
      Their simple, light attire seemed beautiful. It was pleasant to look at
      them, perhaps because their dress revealed the active parts of their body,
      the arms and the legs. Dress here was made to protect, and not to conceal;
      to clothe, and not to muffle.
    </p>
<p>
      The blue and red of the hats and of the dresses gave emphasis to the vivid
      tones of the faces and of the arms and legs. There was a spirit of gaiety
      here, a sense of holiday splendour in these naturally adorned bodies,
      boldly revealed under clear azure skies.
    </p>
<p>
      Some of the children from among those who did not sing approached the
      sisters and looked at them in a friendly manner, smiling trustfully.
    </p>
<p>
      “You may sit down if you like,” said a boy with very blue eyes; “here is a
      bench.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Thank you, my dear,” said Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters sat down. The children wished to talk to them. One little girl
      said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve just seen a little squirrel. It was sitting on a pine. Then I gave a
      shout—you should have seen it run!”
     </p>
<p>
      The others also began to talk and to ask questions. The singers ended
      their song and scattered in all directions to play. The golden-haired
      instructress went up to the sisters and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Have you come from town? Are you pleased with what you have seen here?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, it’s splendid here,” said Elisaveta. “Our place adjoins this. We are
      the Rameyevs. I am Elisaveta. And this is my sister Elena.”
     </p>
<p>
      The golden-haired girl suddenly blushed as if she felt ashamed that the
      wealthy young women were looking at her naked shoulders and at her legs
      naked to the knee. But seeing that they too were barefoot and wore short
      skirts, she quickly recovered and smiled at them.
    </p>
<p>
      “My name is Nadezhda Vestchezerova,” she said.
    </p>
<p>
      She looked attentively at the sisters. Elisaveta thought that she had
      heard the name somewhere in town—perhaps a tale in connexion with
      it, she could not remember exactly what. For some reason she did not
      mention this to Nadezhda. Perhaps it was a tragic history.
    </p>
<p>
      This fear of talking about the past occasionally came upon Elisaveta. Who
      knows what sorrow is hid behind a bright smile, and from what darkness has
      sprung the blossoming which gives sudden joy to a glance, elusively
      beautiful and born of unhappy worldly experience?
    </p>
<p>
      “Did you find your way in easily?” asked the golden-haired Nadezhda with a
      friendly but subtle smile. “It’s usually not a simple matter,” she
      explained.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta replied:
    </p>
<p>
      “A white boy opened the gate for us. He ran off so quickly that we had not
      even the time to thank him.”
     </p>
<p>
      Nadezhda suddenly ceased smiling.
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh yes—he isn’t one of us,” she said falteringly. “They live over
      there with Trirodov. There are several of them. Wouldn’t you like to have
      lunch with us?” she asked, cutting short her previous remarks.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta suspected that Nadezhda wanted to change the subject.
    </p>
<p>
      “We live here all day long, we eat here, we learn here, and we play here—do
      everything here,” said Nadezhda. “People have built cities to escape the
      wild beast, but they themselves have become like wild beasts, like
      savages.”
     </p>
<p>
      A bitter note crept into her voice—was it the echo of her past life
      or was it a thing foreign to her and grafted upon her sensitive nature?
      She continued:
    </p>
<p>
      “We have come from the town into the woods. From the wild beast, from the
      savages of the town. The beast must be killed. The wolf and the fox and
      the hawk—all those who prey upon others—they must be killed.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “How is one to kill a beast who has grown iron and steel nails, and who
      has built his lair in the town? It is he who does the killing, and there’s
      no end in sight to his ferocity.”
     </p>
<p>
      Nadezhda knitted her eyebrows, pressed her hands, and stubbornly repeated:
    </p>
<p>
      “We shall kill him, we shall kill him.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0002" name="link2HCH0002"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER II
    </h2>
<p>
      The sisters stayed to lunch.
    </p>
<p>
      They remained over an hour chattering cheerfully with the children and
      their instructresses. The children were sweet and confiding. The
      instructresses, no less simple and charming, seemed cheerful, care-free,
      and restful. Yet they were always busy, and nothing escaped them. Besides
      many of the children did certain things without being urged, this being
      evidently a part of a system, of which the sisters had as yet barely an
      inkling.
    </p>
<p>
      Instruction was mixed up with play. One of the instructresses invited the
      sisters to listen to what she called her lesson. The sisters listened with
      enjoyment to an interesting discourse concerning the objects the children
      had observed that day in the wood. There were other instructresses who had
      just returned from the depths of the wood—some children were going
      into the wood, others were coming out, quite different ones.
    </p>
<p>
      The instructress to whom the sisters were listening ended her discourse
      and suddenly scampered off somewhere. Through the dark foliage of the
      trees could be seen the glimmer of red caps and of sunburnt arms and legs.
      The sisters were again left alone. No one paid especial attention to them
      any longer; evidently there was no one they either embarrassed or
      hindered.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s time to go,” said Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta made a move.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, let’s go,” she agreed. “It’s very interesting and delightful here,
      but we can’t stay for ever.”
     </p>
<p>
      The departure of the sisters had been noticed. A few of the children ran
      up to them. The children cried gaily:
    </p>
<p>
      “We will show you the way, or you’ll get lost.”
     </p>
<p>
      When the sisters paused at the gate, Elisaveta thought that some one was
      looking at her, out of a hiding-place, with a gaze of astonishment. In
      perplexity, strange and distressing, she looked around her. Behind the
      hedge in the bushes a small boy and a small girl were hiding. They were
      like the others she had seen here, except that they were very white, as
      though the kisses of the stern Dragon floating in the hot sky had left no
      traces upon their tender skin. Both the little boy and the little girl
      were staring with a motionless but attentive gaze. Their chaste look
      seemed to penetrate into the very depth of one’s soul; this rather
      disconcerted Elisaveta. She whispered to Elena:
    </p>
<p>
      “Look, what strange beings!”
     </p>
<p>
      Elena looked in the direction of Elisaveta’s glance and said
      indifferently:
    </p>
<p>
      “Monsters!”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta was astonished at her sister’s observation—the faces of
      these hiding children seemed to her like the faces of praying angels.
    </p>
<p>
      By this time the children who had escorted the sisters ran back, jostling
      each other and laughing. Only one boy remained with them. He opened the
      gate and waited for the sisters to go out so that he could shut it again.
      Elisaveta quietly asked him:
    </p>
<p>
      “Who are these?”
     </p>
<p>
      With a light movement of her head she indicated the bushes, where the boy
      and the girl were hiding. The cheerful urchin looked in the direction of
      her glance, then at her, and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “There’s no one there.”
     </p>
<p>
      And actually no one was now visible in the bushes. Elisaveta persisted:
    </p>
<p>
      “But I did see a boy and a girl there. Both were quite white, not at all
      brown like the rest of you. They stood ever so quietly and looked.”
     </p>
<p>
      The cheery, dark-eyed lad looked attentively at Elisaveta, frowned
      slightly, lowered his eyes, reflected, then again eyed the sisters
      attentively and sadly, and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “In the main building, where Giorgiy Sergeyevitch lives, there are more of
      these quiet children. They are never with us. They are quiet ones. They do
      not play. They have been ill. It’s likely they haven’t improved yet. I
      don’t know. They are kept separately.”
     </p>
<p>
      The boy said this slowly and thoughtfully, as if he were astonished
      because there, in the house of the master, were other children, quiet
      ones, who did not join in their play. Suddenly he shook his head lustily,
      banishing, as it were, unaccustomed thoughts, then took off his cap and
      exclaimed cheerily and with some tenderness:
    </p>
<p>
      “A happy journey, darlings! Follow this footpath.”
     </p>
<p>
      He made an obeisance and ran off. The sisters were quite alone now. They
      went on in the direction given them by the boy. A quiet vale opened up
      before them, and in the distance a white wall was visible, which concealed
      Trirodov’s house. They continued their way towards the house. In front of
      them, keeping close to the bushes, walked a boy in a white dress; he
      appeared to be showing them the way.
    </p>
<p>
      It was very quiet. High above them, protecting himself from the human eye
      by dark purple shields, the flaming Dragon rested. His look from behind
      the deceptive, vacillant shields was hot and evil; he poured out his
      dazzling light, tormented men with it, yet wished them to rejoice in his
      presence and to compose hymns to him. He wished to rule, and it seemed as
      though he were motionless, as though he would never decide to retire. But
      his livid weariness already began to incline him westwards. Still his
      passion grew, and his kisses were scorching, and his infuriated gaze with
      its livid purple dimmed the glances of the two girls.
    </p>
<p>
      The girls’ glances were seeking—seeking Trirodov’s house.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov’s house stood about a verst and a half from the edge of the town,
      not at the end where the dirty and smoky factory buildings squatted, but
      quite at the other end, along the River Skorodyen, above the town of
      Skorodozh. This house and the estate attached to it occupied a
      considerable space, surrounded by a stone wall. One side of the place
      faced the river, the other the town, the rest adjoined the fields and
      woods. The house stood in the middle of an old garden. From behind the
      tall white stone wall the tops of the trees were to be seen, while between
      them, quite high, two turrets of the house, one somewhat higher than the
      other, were visible. The sisters felt as if some one in the high turret
      were looking down upon them.
    </p>
<p>
      There were ominous rumours concerning the house even in the days when it
      belonged to the previous tenant Matov, a kinsman of the Rameyev sisters.
      It was said that the house was inhabited by ghosts, and by phantoms who
      had left their graves. There was a footpath close to the house which led
      across the northern part of the estate, through a wood, to the Krutitsk
      cemetery. In the town they called this the footpath of Navii,<a href="#linknote-2" id="linknoteref-2" name="linknoteref-2"><small>2</small></a>
      and they were afraid to walk upon it even by day. Many legends grew up
      around it. The local <i>intelligentsia</i> tried vainly to disprove them.
      The whole property was sometimes called Navii’s playground. There were
      some who said that they had seen with their own eyes this enigmatic
      inscription on the gates: “Three went in, two came out.” This inscription
      was, of course, no longer there. Now only lightly cut-out figures were to
      be seen, one under the other: ‘3’ on top, ‘2’ lower, and ‘1’ at the
      bottom.
    </p>
<p>
      All the evil rumours and warnings did not prevent Giorgiy Sergeyevitch
      Trirodov from buying the house. He made changes in it, and then settled
      here after his comparatively brief educational career had been rudely cut
      short.
    </p>
<p>
      It took a long time to rebuild and transform the house. The high walls
      prevented any one from seeing what was being done there. This aroused the
      curiosity of the townsfolk and caused all sorts of malicious gossip. The
      working men did not belong to the place, but were brought from a distance.
      Dark and short and rather gruff-looking, they did not understand the local
      speech, and seldom showed themselves in the streets.
    </p>
<p>
      “They are wicked and dark” was said about them in the town. “They carry
      knives about with them, and dig underground passages in Navii’s
      playground. He himself is clean-shaven like a German, and he’s imported
      these foreign earth-diggers.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
      “I like that red-haired instructress, Nadezhda Vestchezerova,” said Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      She looked searchingly at her sister.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, she’s very sincere,” answered Elisaveta. ‘“A fine girl.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They are all charming,” said Elena with greater assurance.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” observed Elisaveta, with indecision in her voice. “But there is
      that other—the one that ran away from us—there’s something I
      don’t like about her. Perhaps it’s a slight veneer of hypocrisy.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why do you say so?” asked Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      “I simply feel it. She smiles too pleasantly, too lovingly. She seems in
      every way phlegmatic, yet she tries to appear animated. Her words come
      rather easily sometimes, and she exaggerates.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
      It was quiet in the garden behind the stone wall. This was Kirsha’s free
      hour. But he could not play, though he tried to.
    </p>
<p>
      Little Kirsha, Trirodov’s son, whose mother had died not long before, was
      dark and thin. He had a very mobile face and restless dark eyes. He was
      dressed like the boys in the wood. He was quite restless to-day. He felt
      sad without knowing why. He felt as if some invisible being were drawing
      him on, calling to him in an inaudible whisper, demanding something—what?
      And who was it approaching their house? Why? Friend or foe? It was a
      stranger—yet curiously intimate.
    </p>
<p>
      At that moment, when the sisters were taking leave of the children in the
      wood, Kirsha felt especially perturbed. In the far corner of the garden he
      saw a boy in white dress; he ran up to him. They spoke long and quietly.
      Then Kirsha ran to his father.
    </p>
<p>
      Giorgiy Sergeyevitch Trirodov was all alone at home. He was lying on the
      sofa, reading a book by Wilde.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov was forty years old. He was slender and erect. His short-trimmed
      hair and clean-shaven face made him look very young. Only on closer
      scrutiny it was possible to detect the many grey hairs, the wrinkles on
      the forehead around the eyes. His face was pale. His broad forehead seemed
      very large—it was partly due to a narrow chin, lean cheeks, and
      baldness.
    </p>
<p>
      The room where Trirodov was reading—his study—was large,
      bright, and simple, with a white, unpainted floor as smooth as a mirror.
      The walls were lined with open bookcases. In the wall opposite the
      windows, between the bookcases, a narrow space was left, large enough for
      a man to stand in. It gave the impression of a door being there, hidden by
      hangings. In the middle of the room stood a very large table, upon which
      lay books, papers, and several strange objects—hexahedral prisms of
      an unfamiliar substance, heavy and solid in appearance, dark red in
      colour, with purple, blue, grey, and black spots, and with veins running
      across it.
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha knocked on the door and entered—quiet, small, troubled.
      Trirodov looked at him anxiously. Kirsha said:
    </p>
<p>
      “There are two young women in the wood. Such an inquisitive pair. They
      have been looking over our colony. Now they’d like to come here to take a
      look round.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov let the pale green ribbon with a lightly stamped pattern fall
      upon the page he was reading and laid the book on the small table at his
      side. He then took Kirsha by the hand, drew him close, and looked
      attentively at him, with a slight stir in his eyes; then said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “You’ve been asking questions of those quiet boys again.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha grew red, but stood erect and calm, Trirodov continued to reproach
      him:
    </p>
<p>
      “How often have I told you that this is wicked. It is bad for you and for
      them.”
     </p>
<p>
      “It’s all the same to them,” said Kirsha quietly.
    </p>
<p>
      “How do you know?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha shrugged his shoulders and said obstinately:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why are they here? What are they to us?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov turned away, then rose abruptly, went to the window, and looked
      gloomily into the garden. Clearly something was agitating his
      consciousness, something that needed deciding. Kirsha quietly walked up to
      him, stepping softly upon the white, warm floor with his sunburnt graceful
      feet, high in instep, and with long, beautiful, well-formed toes. He
      touched his father on the shoulder, quietly rested his sunburnt hand
      there, and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “You know, daddy, that I seldom do this, only when I must. I felt very
      much troubled to-day. I knew that something would happen.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What will happen?” asked his father.
    </p>
<p>
      “I have a feeling,” said Kirsha with a pleading voice, “that you must let
      them in to us—these inquisitive girls.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov looked very attentively at his son and smiled. Kirsha said
      gravely:
    </p>
<p>
      “The elder one is very charming. In some way she is like mother. But the
      other is also nice.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What brings them here?” again asked Trirodov. “They might have waited
      until their elders brought them here.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha smiled, sighed lightly, and said thoughtfully, shrugging his small
      shoulders:
    </p>
<p>
      “All women are curious. What’s to be done with them?”
     </p>
<p>
      Smiling now joyously, now gravely, Trirodov asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “And will mother not come to us?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Oh, if she only came, if only for one little minute!” exclaimed Kirsha.
    </p>
<p>
      “What are we to do with these girls?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Invite them in, show them the house,” replied Kirsha.
    </p>
<p>
      “And the quiet children?” quietly asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “The quiet children also like the elder one,” answered Kirsha.
    </p>
<p>
      “And who are they, these girls?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “They are our neighbours, the Rameyevs,” said Kirsha.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov smiled again and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, one can understand why they are so curious.”
     </p>
<p>
      He frowned, went to the table, put his hand on one of the dark, heavy
      prisms and picked it up cautiously, and again carefully put it back in its
      place, saying at the same time to Kirsha:
    </p>
<p>
      “Go, then, and meet them and bring them here.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha, growing animated, asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “By the door or through the grotto?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, bring them through the dark passage, underground.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha went out. Trirodov was left alone. He opened the drawer of his
      writing-table, took out a strangely shaped flagon of green glass filled
      with a dark fluid, and looked in the direction of the secret door. At that
      instant it opened quietly and easily. A pale, quiet boy entered and looked
      at Trirodov with his dispassionate and innocent, but understanding eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov went up to him. A reproach was ripe on his tongue but he could
      not say it. Pity and tenderness clung to his lips. Silently he gave the
      strange-shaped flagon to the boy. The boy went out quietly.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0003" name="link2HCH0003"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER III
    </h2>
<p>
      The sisters entered a thicket. The path’s many turnings made them giddy.
      Suddenly the turrets of the old house vanished from sight. Everything
      around them assumed an unfamiliar look.
    </p>
<p>
      “We seem to have lost our way,” said Elena cheerfully.
    </p>
<p>
      “Never fear, we’ll find our way out,” replied Elisaveta. “We are bound to
      get somewhere.”
     </p>
<p>
      At that instant there came towards them from among the bushes the small,
      sunburnt, handsome Kirsha. His dark, closely grown eyebrows and black wavy
      hair, unspoiled by headgear, gave him the wild look of a wood-sprite.
    </p>
<p>
      “Dear boy, where do you come from?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha eyed the sisters with an attentive, direct, and innocent gaze. He
      said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I am Kirsha Trirodov. Follow this path, and you’ll find yourselves where
      you want to go. I’ll go ahead of you.”
     </p>
<p>
      He turned and walked on. The sisters followed him upon the narrow path
      between the tall trees. Here and there flowers were visible—small,
      white, odorous flowers. They emitted a strange, pungent smell. It made the
      sisters feel both gay and languid. Kirsha walked silently before them.
    </p>
<p>
      At the end of the road loomed a mound, overgrown by tangled, ugly grass.
      At the foot of the mound was a rusty door which looked as if it were meant
      to hide some treasure.
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha felt in his pocket, took out a key, and opened the door. It creaked
      unpleasantly and breathed out cold, dampness, and fear. A long dark
      passage became discernible. Kirsha pressed a spot near the door. The dark
      passage became lit up as though by electric light, but the lights
      themselves were not visible.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters entered the grotto. The light poured from everywhere. But the
      sources of light remained a mystery. The walls themselves seemed to
      radiate. The light fell evenly, and neither bright reflections nor shadowy
      places were to be seen.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters went on. Now they were alone. The door closed behind them with
      a grating sound. Kirsha ran on ahead. The sisters no longer saw him. The
      corridor was sinuous. It was difficult to walk fast for some unknown
      reason. A kind of weight seemed to fetter their limbs. The passage
      inclined slightly downwards. They walked on like this a long time. It grew
      hotter and damper the farther they advanced. There was an aroma—strange,
      sad, and exotic. The fragrance increased, became more and more languorous.
      It made the head dizzy and the heart ready to faint with a sweetness not
      free from pain.
    </p>
<p>
      It seemed an incredibly long way. Their legs now moved more slowly. The
      stone floor was cruelly hard.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s almost impossible to walk,” whispered Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      Those few moments seemed like ages in that dank, sultry underground. There
      seemed to be no end to the narrow winding passage; the two sisters felt as
      though they were doomed to walk on and on, for ever and ever, without
      reaching any place.
    </p>
<p>
      The light gradually grew dimmer, a thin mist rose before their eyes. Still
      they walked on along the cruel, endless way.
    </p>
<p>
      Suddenly their journey was done. Before them was an open door, a shaft of
      white, exultant light came pouring in—freedom’s own ecstasy.
    </p>
<p>
      The door opened into an immense greenhouse. Strange, muscular, monstrously
      green plants grew here. The air was very humid, very oppressive. The glass
      walls intersected by iron bars let through much light. The light was
      painfully, pitilessly dazzling, so that everything appeared in a whirl
      before their eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      Elena glanced at her dress. It struck her as being grey, worn out. But the
      bright light diverted her glances elsewhere and made her forget herself.
      The blue-green glass sky of the greenhouse flung down sparks and heat. The
      cruel Dragon rejoiced at the earthly respirations confined in this prison
      of glass. He furiously kissed his beloved poisonous grasses.
    </p>
<p>
      “It is even more terrible here than in the passage,” said Elisaveta.
      “Let’s leave this place quickly.”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, it is pleasant here,” said Elena with a happy smile. She was enjoying
      the pink and purple flowers which bloomed in a round basin.
    </p>
<p>
      But Elisaveta walked rapidly towards the door leading to the garden. Elena
      overtook her, and grumbled:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why are you running? Here is a bench; let’s rest here.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov met them in the garden just outside the greenhouse. His manner of
      addressing them was simple and direct.
    </p>
<p>
      “I believe,” he began, “that you are interested in this house and its
      owner. Well, if you like I’ll show you a part of my kingdom.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elena blushed. Elisaveta calmly bowed and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, we are an inquisitive pair. This house once belonged to a relative,
      but it was left abandoned. It is said that many changes have been made.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, many changes have been made,” said Trirodov quietly, “but the
      greater part remains as it was.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Every one was astonished,” continued Elisaveta, “when you decided to
      settle here. The reputation of the house did not hinder you.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov led the sisters through the house and the garden. The
      conversation ran on smoothly. The sisters’ embarrassment was soon gone.
      They felt quite natural with Trirodov. His calm, friendly voice put them
      wholly at ease. They continued to walk and to observe. But they felt
      conscious that another life, intimate yet remote, hovered round them all
      the while. Sounds of music came to them at intervals; sometimes it was the
      doleful tones of a violin, sometimes the quiet plaint of a flute; again it
      was the reed-like voice of some unseen singer which sang a tender and
      restful song.
    </p>
<p>
      Upon one small lawn, in the shade of old trees, whose foliage protected
      them from the hot glare of the Dragon, making it pleasantly cool and
      pleasantly dark there, a number of small boys and girls, dressed in white,
      had formed a ring and were dancing. As the sisters approached them the
      children dispersed. They scampered off so quietly that they barely made a
      sound even when they brushed against the twigs; they vanished as though
      they had not been there.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters listened to Trirodov as they walked, pausing often to admire
      the beauties of the garden—its trees, lawns, ponds, islands, its
      quietly murmuring fountains, its picturesque arbours, its profusely gay
      flower-beds. They felt a keen elation at having penetrated this mysterious
      house—they were as happy as schoolgirls at the thought of having
      infringed the commonly accepted rules of good society in coming here.
    </p>
<p>
      As they entered one room of the house Elena exclaimed:
    </p>
<p>
      “What a strange room!”
     </p>
<p>
      “A magic room,” said Trirodov with a smile.
    </p>
<p>
      It was indeed a strange room—everything in it had an odd shape: the
      ceiling sloped, the floor was concave, the corners were round, upon the
      walls were incomprehensible pictures and unfamiliar hieroglyphics. In one
      corner was a dark, flat object in a carved frame of black wood.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s a mirror in which it is interesting to take a look at oneself,” said
      Trirodov. “Only you have to stand in that triangle close to the wall, near
      the corner.”
     </p>
<p>
      The sisters went there and glanced in the mirror: two old wrinkled faces
      were reflected in it. Elena cried out in fright. Elisaveta, growing pale,
      turned towards her sister and smiled.
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t be afraid,” she said, “it’s a trick of some sort.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elena looked at her and cried out in horror:
    </p>
<p>
      “You have become quite old—grey-haired! How awful!”
     </p>
<p>
      She ran from the mirror, crying out in her fright:
    </p>
<p>
      “What is it? What is it?”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta followed her. She did not understand what had happened; she was
      agitated, and tried to hide her confusion. Trirodov looked at them in a
      self-possessed manner. He opened a cupboard, inset in the wall.
    </p>
<p>
      “Be calm,” he said to Elena. “I’ll give you some water in a moment.”
     </p>
<p>
      He gave her a glass containing a fluid as colourless as water. Elena
      quickly drank the sour-sweet water, and suddenly felt cheerful. Elisaveta
      also drank it. Elena threw herself towards the mirror.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’m young again,” she exclaimed in a high voice.
    </p>
<p>
      Then she ran forward, embraced Elisaveta, and said cheerfully:
    </p>
<p>
      “And you too, Elisaveta, have grown young.”
     </p>
<p>
      An impetuous joy seized both sisters. They caught each other by the hands
      and began to dance and to twirl round the room. Then they suddenly felt
      ashamed. They stopped, and did not know which way to look; they laughed in
      their confusion. Elisaveta said:
    </p>
<p>
      “What a stupid pair we are! You think us ridiculous, don’t you?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov smiled in a friendly fashion:
    </p>
<p>
      “That is the nature of this place,” he observed. “Terror and joy live here
      together.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
      The sisters were shown many interesting things in the house—objects
      of art and of worship; things which told of distant lands and of hoary
      antiquity; engravings of a strange and disturbing character; variegated
      stones, turquoise, pearls; ugly, amorphous, and grotesque idols;
      representations of the god-child—there were many of these, but only
      one face profoundly stirred Elisaveta....
    </p>
<p>
      Elena enjoyed the objects that resembled toys. There were many things
      there that one could play with, and thus indulge in a jumble of magic
      reflections of time and space.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters had seen so much that it seemed as if an age had passed, but
      actually they had spent only two hours here. It is impossible to measure
      time. One hour is an age, another is an instant; but humanity makes no
      distinction, levels the hours down to an average.
    </p>
<p>
      “What, only two hours!” exclaimed Elena. “How long we’ve spent here. It’s
      time to go home for dinner.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Do you mind being a little late?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “How can we?” said Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta explained:
    </p>
<p>
      “The hour of dinner is strictly kept in our house.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’ll have a cart ready for you.”
     </p>
<p>
      The sisters thanked him. But they must start at once. They both suddenly
      felt sad and tired. They bade their host good-bye and left him. The boy in
      white went before them in the garden and showed them the way.
    </p>
<p>
      No sooner had they again entered the underground passage than they saw a
      soft couch, and a fatigue so poignant suddenly overcame them that they
      could not advance another step.
    </p>
<p>
      “Let’s sit down,” said Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” replied Elisaveta, “I too am tired. How strange! What a weariness!”
     </p>
<p>
      The sisters sat down. Elisaveta said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “The light that falls upon us here from an unknown source is not a living
      light, and it is terrifying—but the stern face of the monster,
      burning yet not consuming itself, is even more terrifying.”
     </p>
<p>
      “The lovely sun,” said Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      “It will become extinguished,” said Elisaveta, “extinguished—this
      unrighteous luminary, and in the depth of subterranean passages, freed
      from the scorching Dragon and from cold that kills, men will erect a new
      life full of wisdom.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elena whispered:
    </p>
<p>
      “When the earth grows cold, men will die.”
     </p>
<p>
      “The earth will not die,” answered Elisaveta no less quietly.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters fell into a sleep. They did not sleep long, and when both
      awakened quite suddenly, everything that had just happened seemed like a
      dream. They made haste.
    </p>
<p>
      “We must hurry home,” said Elena in an anxious voice.
    </p>
<p>
      They ran quickly. The door of the underground passage was open. Just
      outside the door, in the road, stood a cart. Kirsha sat in it and held the
      reins. The sisters seated themselves. Elisaveta took the reins. Kirsha
      spoke a word now and then. They said little on the way, in odd, disjointed
      words.
    </p>
<p>
      Arrived at their destination, they got out of the cart. They were in a
      half-somnolent state. Kirsha was off before they realized that they had
      not thanked him. When they looked for him they could only see a cloud of
      dust and hear the clatter of hoofs and the rattle of wheels on the
      cobblestones.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0004" name="link2HCH0004"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER IV
    </h2>
<p>
      The sisters had barely time to change for dinner. They entered the
      dining-room somewhat weary and distraught. They were awaited there by
      their father Rameyev, the two Matovs—the student Piotr Dmitrievitch
      and the schoolboy Misha, sons of Rameyev’s lately deceased cousin to whom
      Trirodov’s estate had previously belonged.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters spoke little at the table, and they said nothing of their
      day’s adventure. Yet before this they used to be frank and loved to chat,
      to tell the things that had happened to them.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr Matov, a tall, spare, pale youth with sparkling eyes, who looked
      like a man about to enter a prophetic school, seemed worried and
      irritated. His nervousness reflected itself, in embarrassed smiles and
      awkward movements, in Misha. The latter was a well-nourished, rosy-cheeked
      lad, with a quick, merry eye, but betraying his intense
      impressionableness. His smiling mouth trembled slightly around the
      corners, apparently without cause.
    </p>
<p>
      The old Rameyev, who was more robust than tall, and had the tranquil
      manners of a well-trained, well-balanced individual, did not betray his
      impatience at his daughters’ tardy appearance, but took his place at the
      partially extended table, which seemed small in the middle of the immense
      dining-room of dark, embellished oak. Miss Harrison, unembarrassed, began
      to ladle out the soup; she was a plump, calm, slightly grey-haired woman,
      the personification of a successful household.
    </p>
<p>
      Rameyev noticed that his daughters were tired. A vague alarm stirred
      within him. But he quickly extinguished this tiny spark of displeasure,
      smiled tenderly at his daughters, and said very quietly, as if cautiously
      hinting at something:
    </p>
<p>
      “You have walked a little too far, my dears.”
     </p>
<p>
      There was a short but awkward silence; then, in order to soften the hidden
      significance of his words and to ease his daughters’ embarrassment, he
      added:
    </p>
<p>
      “I see you don’t ride horseback as much as you used to.”
     </p>
<p>
      After this he turned to the eldest of the brothers:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, Petya, have you brought any news from town?”
     </p>
<p>
      The sisters felt uneasy. They tried to take part in the conversation.
    </p>
<p>
      This was in those days when the red demon of murder was prowling in our
      native land, and his terrible deeds brought discord and hate into the
      bosom of peaceful families. The young people in this house, as elsewhere,
      often talked and wrangled about what had happened and what was yet to be.
      For all their wrangling, they could not reach any agreement. Friendship
      from childhood and good breeding mitigated to some extent this antagonism
      of ideas. But more than once their discussions ended in bitter words.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr, in reply to Rameyev, began to tell about working-men’s disturbances
      and projected strikes. Irritation was evident in his voice. He was one of
      those who was intensely troubled by problems of a religious-philosophical
      character. He thought that the mystical existence of human unities might
      be achieved only under the brilliant and alluring sway of Caesars and
      Popes. He imagined that he loved freedom—Christian freedom—yet
      all the turbulent movements of newly awakened life aroused only hate in
      his heart.
    </p>
<p>
      “There’s terrible news,” said Piotr; “a general strike is talked of. It is
      reported that all the factories will shut down to-morrow.”
     </p>
<p>
      Misha burst into an unexpected laugh; it was loud, merry, and childlike;
      and there was almost rapture in his remark:
    </p>
<p>
      “But you ought to see the sort of face the Headmaster makes on all such
      occasions.”
     </p>
<p>
      His voice was tender and sonorous, and it rang so softly and sweetly that
      he might have been telling about the blessed and the innocent, about the
      chaste play on the threshold of paradisian abodes. The words “strike” and
      “obstruction” came from his lips like the names of rare, sweet morsels. He
      grew cheerful and had a sudden desire to make things lively in schoolboy
      fashion. He began to sing loudly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Awake, rise up....”
     </p>
<p>
      But he became confused, stopped sadly, grew quiet, and blushed. The
      sisters laughed. Piotr had a surly look. Rameyev smiled benignly. Miss
      Harrison, pretending not to have noticed the discordant incident, calmly
      pressed the button of the electric bell attached on a cord to the hanging
      light to bring on the next course.
    </p>
<p>
      The dinner proceeded slowly in the usual order. The discussion grew
      hotter, and went helter-skelter from subject to subject. Such is said to
      be the Russian manner in argument. Perhaps it is the universal manner of
      people when discussing something that touches them deeply.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr exclaimed hotly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why is the autocracy of the proletariat better than the one already in
      force? And what wild, barbarous watchwords they have! ‘Who is not with us,
      he is against us!’ ‘Who is master, let him get down from his place; it’s
      our banquet.’”
     </p>
<p>
      “It’s yet too early to speak of our banquet,” said Elena in a restrained
      voice.
    </p>
<p>
      “Do you know where we are drifting?” continued Piotr. “There will be a
      reign of terror, and a shaking up such as Russia has not yet experienced.
      The point at issue is not that there is talking or doing here or there by
      certain gentry who imagine that they are making history. The real issue is
      in the clash of two classes, two interests, two cultures, two conceptions
      of the world, two moral systems. Who is it that wishes to seize the crown
      of lordship? It is the <i>Kham</i>,<a href="#linknote-3" id="linknoteref-3" name="linknoteref-3"><small>3</small></a> it is he who
      threatens to devour our culture.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta said reproachfully:
    </p>
<p>
      “What a word—<i>Kham</i>!”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr smiled in a nervous and aggrieved manner, and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “You don’t like it?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I don’t like it,” said Elisaveta calmly.
    </p>
<p>
      With her habitual subjection to the thoughts and moods of her elder
      sister, Elena said:
    </p>
<p>
      “It is a rude word. I feel a reminiscence of a once helpless serfdom in
      it.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Nevertheless this word is now sufficiently literary,” said Piotr, with a
      vague smile. “And why shouldn’t one use it? It’s not the word that
      matters. We have seen countless instances with our own eyes of the
      progress of the spiritual bossiak<a href="#linknote-4" id="linknoteref-4" name="linknoteref-4"><small>4</small></a> who is savagely indifferent to
      everything, who is hopelessly wild, malicious, and drunken for generations
      to come. He will crush everything—science, art, everything! A good
      characteristic specimen of a <i>kham</i> is your Stchemilov, with whom,
      Elisaveta, you sympathize so strongly. He’s a familiar young fellow, a
      handsome flunkey.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr fixed his eyes on Elisaveta. She replied calmly:
    </p>
<p>
      “I think you very unjust to him. He is a good man.”
     </p>
<p>
      Every one was glad when dinner was ended. It was a provoking conversation.
      Even the imperturbable Miss Harrison rose from her place rather sooner
      than usual. Rameyev went to his own room to get his hour’s nap. The young
      people went into the garden. Misha and Elena ran downhill to the river.
      They had a keen desire to run one after the other and to laugh.
    </p>
<p>
      “Elisaveta!” called out Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      His voice trembled nervously. Elisaveta paused. She now stood within the
      deep shadow of an old linden. She looked questioningly at Piotr, her
      graceful bare arms folded on her breast; suddenly her heart beat faster.
      What a power of bewitchment was in those most lovable arms—oh, why
      did not some sudden impulse of passion throw them upon his shoulders!
    </p>
<p>
      “May I speak a few words to you, Elisaveta?” asked Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta flushed a little, lowered her head, and said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Let’s sit down somewhere.”
     </p>
<p>
      She walked along the path towards the small summer-house which looked down
      the slope. Piotr followed her silently. In silence also they ascended the
      steep passage. Elisaveta seated herself and rested her arms upon the low
      rail of the open summer-house. The undulating distances lay before her in
      one broad panoramic sweep—a view intimate from childhood, and which
      never failed to awaken the same delightful emotion. She was looking no
      longer at the separate objects—Nature poured herself out like music
      before her, in an inexhaustible play of colour and of soothing sound.
      Piotr stood before her and looked at her handsome face. The setting Dragon
      caressed Elisaveta’s face with its warm light; the skin thus suffused
      exulted in its radiance and bloom.
    </p>
<p>
      They were silent. Both felt a painful awkwardness. Piotr was nervously
      breaking twigs from a birch near by. Elisaveta began:
    </p>
<p>
      “What is it you wish to tell me?”
     </p>
<p>
      A cold remoteness, almost enmity, sounded in her deeply agitated voice.
      She felt her own harshness, to soften which she smiled gently and timidly.
    </p>
<p>
      “What’s there to say,” began Piotr quietly and irresolutely, “but one and
      the same thing. Elisaveta, I love you!”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta flushed. Her eyes gave a sudden flare, then grew dull. She rose
      from her seat and spoke in an agitated manner:
    </p>
<p>
      “Piotr, why do you again torment yourself and me needlessly? We have been
      so intimate from childhood—yet it seems that we must part! Our ways
      are different, we think differently, and believe differently.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr listened to her with an expression of intense impatience and
      vexation. Elisaveta wished to continue, but he interrupted:
    </p>
<p>
      “Ah, but what’s the good of saying that? Elisaveta, do, I beg you, forget
      our differences. They are so petty! Or let us admit that they are
      significant. What I wish to say is that politics and all that separates us
      is only a light scum, a momentary froth on the broad surface of our life.
      In love there is revelation, there is eternal truth. He who does not love,
      he who does not strive towards union with a beloved, he is dead.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I love the people, I love freedom,” said Elisaveta quietly. “My love is
      revolt.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr, ignoring her words, went on:
    </p>
<p>
      “You know that I love you. I have loved you a long time. My whole soul is
      absorbed as with light with my love for you. I am jealous—and I’m
      not ashamed to tell you I am jealous of your favour to any one; I am even
      jealous of this bloused workman, whose accomplice you would be if he had
      had the sufficient boldness and the brain to be a conspirator; I am
      jealous of the half-truths which have captivated you and screen your love
      of me.”
     </p>
<p>
      Again Elisaveta spoke quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “You reproach me for what is dear to me, for my better part, you wish that
      I should become different. You do not love me, you are tempted by the
      beautiful Beast—my young body with its smiles and its caresses....”
     </p>
<p>
      And again ignoring what she said, Piotr asserted passionately:
    </p>
<p>
      “Elisaveta, dearest, love me! You surely do not love any one else! Isn’t
      that so? You do not love any one? You have had no time to fall in love, to
      fetter your soul to any one else’s. You are as free as man’s first bride,
      you are as superb as his last wife. You have grown ripe for love—for
      my love—you too are thirsty for kisses and embraces, even as I. O
      Elisaveta, love me, love me!”
     </p>
<p>
      “How can I?” said Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “Elisaveta, if you’d only will it!” exclaimed Piotr. “One must wish to
      love. If you only understood how I love you, you would love me also. My
      love should fire in you a responsive love.”
     </p>
<p>
      “My friend, you do not love anything that is mine,” answered Elisaveta.
      “You do not love me. I don’t believe you—forgive me—I don’t
      understand your love.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr frowned gloomily and said gruffly:
    </p>
<p>
      “You have been fascinated by that false, empty word freedom. You have
      never thought over its true meaning.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’ve had little time to think over anything,” observed Elisaveta calmly,
      “but the feeling of freedom is the thing nearest to me. I cannot express
      it in words—I only know that we are fettered on this earth by iron
      bonds of necessity and of circumstance, but the nature of my soul is
      freedom; its fire is consuming the chains of my material dependence. I
      know that we human beings will always be frail, poor, lonely; but a time
      will surely come when we shall pass through the purifying flame of a great
      conflagration; then a new earth and a new heaven shall open up to us;
      through union we shall attain our final freedom. I know I am saying all
      this badly, incoherently—I cannot say clearly what I feel—but
      let us, please, say no more.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta strode out of the summer-house. Piotr slowly followed her. His
      face was sad and his eyes shone feverishly, but he could not utter a word—inertia
      gripped his mind. Quite suddenly he roused himself, raised his head,
      smiled, overtook Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “You love me, Elisaveta,” he said with joyous assurance. “You love me,
      though you won’t admit it. You are not speaking the truth when you say
      that you don’t understand my love. You do know my love, you do believe in
      it—tell me, is it possible to love so strongly and not be loved in
      return?”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta stopped. Her eyes lit up with a strange joy.
    </p>
<p>
      “I tell you once more,” she said with calm resolution, “it is not me you
      love—you love the First Bride. I am going where I must.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr stood there and looked after her—helpless, pale, dejected.
      Between the bushes a sun-yellow dress fluttered against the now dull sky
      of a setting sun.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0005" name="link2HCH0005"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER V
    </h2>
<p>
      Piotr and Elisaveta descended towards the boat landing. Two rowing-boats
      seemed to rock on the water, though there was no breeze and the water was
      smooth like a mirror. A little farther, behind the bushes, the canvas roof
      of the bath-house stood revealed. Elena, Misha, and Miss Harrison were
      already there. They were sitting on a bench halfway down the slope, where
      the path to the landing was broken. The view from here, showing the bend
      of the river, was very restful. The water was growing darker, heavier,
      gradually assuming a leadlike dullness.
    </p>
<p>
      Misha and Elena, flushed with running, could not suppress their smiles.
      The Englishwoman looked calmly at the river, and nothing shocked her in
      the evening landscape and in the peaceful water. But now two persons came
      who brought with them their poignant unrest, their uneasiness, their
      confusion—and again an endless wrangle began.
    </p>
<p>
      They left this bench, from which one could look into such a great distance
      and see nothing but calm and peace everywhere. They descended below to the
      very bank. Even at this close range the water was still and smooth, and
      the agitated words of the restless people did not cause the broad sheet to
      stir. Misha picked up thin, flat stones and threw them underhand into the
      distance so that, touching the water, they skipped repeatedly on the
      surface. He did this habitually whenever the wrangling distressed him. His
      hands trembled, the little stones ricochetted badly sometimes; this
      annoyed him, but he tried to hide his annoyance and to look cheerful.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Misha, let’s see who can throw the better. Let’s try for pennies.”
     </p>
<p>
      They began to play. Misha was losing.
    </p>
<p>
      At the turn of the river, from the direction of the town, a rowing-boat
      appeared. Piotr looked searchingly into the distance, and said in a vexed
      voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Mr. Stchemilov, our intelligent workman, the Social Democrat of the
      Russia Party, is again about to honour us.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta smiled. She asked with gentle reproof:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why do you dislike him so?”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, you tell me,” exclaimed Piotr, “why this party calls itself the
      Russia Party, and not the Russian Party? Why this high tone?”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta answered with her usual calm:
    </p>
<p>
      “It is called the Russia and not the Russian Party because it includes not
      only the Russian, but also the Lithuanian, the Armenian, the Jew, and men
      of other races who happen to be citizens of Russia. It seems to me this is
      quite comprehensible.”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, I do not understand,” said Piotr obstinately. “I see in it only
      unnecessary pretence.”
     </p>
<p>
      In the meantime the boat drew nearer. Two men were sitting in it. Aleksei
      Makarovitch Stchemilov, a young working man, a locksmith by trade, sat at
      the oars. He was thin and of medium height; there was a suggestion of
      irony in the shape of his lips. Elisaveta had known Stchemilov since the
      past autumn, when she became acquainted with other labouring men and party
      workmen.
    </p>
<p>
      The boat touched the landing, and Stchemilov sprang out gracefully. Piotr
      remarked derisively as he bowed with exaggerated politeness:
    </p>
<p>
      “My homage to the proletariat of all lands.”
     </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov answered quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “My most humble respects to the gentleman student.”
     </p>
<p>
      He exchanged greetings with all; then, turning with special deference
      towards Elisaveta, said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve rowed back your property. It was almost taken from me. Our
      suburbanites have their own conceptions of the divine rights of
      ownership.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr boiled over with vexation—the very sight of this young
      blouse-wearer irritated him beyond bounds; he thought Stchemilov’s manners
      and speech arrogant. Piotr said sharply:
    </p>
<p>
      “As far as I understand your notion of things, it is not rights that are
      holy, but brute force.”
     </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov whistled and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “That is the origin of all ownership. You simply took a thing—and
      that’s all there was to it. ‘Blessed are the strong’ is a little adage
      among those who have conquered violently.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And how did you get hold of this?” asked Piotr with derision.
    </p>
<p>
      “Crumbs of wisdom fall from the tables of the rich even to us,” answered
      Stchemilov in a no less contemptuous tone; “we nourish ourselves on these
      small trifles.”
     </p>
<p>
      The other young man, clearly a workman also, remained in the boat. He
      looked rather timid, lean, and taciturn, and had gleaming eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      He sat holding on to the ropes of the rudder, and was looking cautiously
      towards the bank. Stchemilov looked at him with amused tenderness and
      called to him:
    </p>
<p>
      “Come here, Kiril, don’t be afraid; there are kindly people here—quite
      disposed to us, in fact.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr grumbled angrily under his breath. Misha smiled. He was eager to see
      the new-comer, though he hated violent discussions. Kiril got out of the
      boat awkwardly, and no less awkwardly stood up on the sand, his face
      averted; he smiled to hide his uneasiness. Piotr’s irritation grew.
    </p>
<p>
      “Please be seated,” he said, trying to assume a pleasant tone.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve done a lot of sitting,” answered Kiril in an artificial bass voice.
    </p>
<p>
      He continued to smile, but sat down on the edge of the bench, so that he
      nearly fell over; his arms shot up into the air, and one of his hands
      brushed against Elisaveta. He felt vexed with himself, and he flushed. As
      he moved away from the edge he remarked:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve sat two months in administrative order."<a href="#linknote-5" id="linknoteref-5" name="linknoteref-5"><small>5</small></a>
</p>
<p>
      Every one understood these strange words. Piotr asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “For what?”
     </p>
<p>
      Kiril seemed embarrassed. He answered with a morose uneasiness:
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s all a very simple affair with us—you do the slightest thing,
      and they try at once the most murderous measures.”
     </p>
<p>
      At this moment Stchemilov said very quietly to Elisaveta:
    </p>
<p>
      “Not a bad chap. He wants to become acquainted with you, comrade.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta silently inclined her head, smiled amiably at Kiril, and pressed
      his hand. His face brightened.
    </p>
<p>
      Rameyev came up to them. He greeted his visitors pleasantly but coldly,
      giving an impression of studied correctness. The conversation continued
      somewhat awkwardly. Elisaveta’s blue eyes looked gently and pensively at
      the irritated Piotr and at his deliberately inimical adversary Stchemilov.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Mr. Stchemilov, would you care to explain to me this talk of an autocracy
      by the proletariat? You admit the need of an autocracy, but only wish to
      shift it to another centre? In what way is this an improvement?”
     </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov answered quite simply:
    </p>
<p>
      “You masters and possessors do not wish to give us anything—neither
      a fraction of an ounce of power nor of possessions; what’s left for us to
      do?”
     </p>
<p>
      “What’s your immediate object?” put in Rameyev.
    </p>
<p>
      “Immediate or ultimate—what’s that!” answered Stchemilov. “We have
      only one object: the public ownership of the machinery of production.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What of the land?” cried out Piotr rather shrilly.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, the land too we consider as machinery of production,” answered
      Stchemilov.
    </p>
<p>
      “You imagine that there is an infinite amount of land in Russia?” asked
      Piotr with bitter irony.
    </p>
<p>
      “Not an infinite amount, but certainly enough to go round—and plenty
      for every one,” was Stchemilov’s calm reply.
    </p>
<p>
      “Ten—or, say, a hundred—acres per soul? Is that what you
      mean?” continued Piotr in loud derision. “You’ve got that idea into the
      heads of the muzhiks, and now they’re in revolt.”
     </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov again whistled, and said with contemptuous calm:
    </p>
<p>
      “Fiddlesticks! The muzhik is not as stupid as all that. And in any case,
      let me ask you what hindered the opposing side from hammering the right
      ideas into the muzhik’s mind?”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr got up angrily and strode away without saying another word. Rameyev
      looked quietly after him and said to Stchemilov:
    </p>
<p>
      “Piotr loves culture, or, more properly speaking, civilization, too well
      to appreciate freedom. You insist too strongly on your class interests,
      and therefore freedom is no such great lure to you. But we Russian
      constitutionalists are carrying on the struggle for freedom almost alone.”
     </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov listened to him and made an effort to suppress an ironic smile.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s true,” he said, “we won’t join hands with you. You wish to fly about
      in the free air; while we are still ravenously hungry and want to eat.”
     </p>
<p>
      Rameyev said after a brief silence:
    </p>
<p>
      “I am appalled at this savagery. Murders every day, every day.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What’s there to do?” asked Stchemilov, persisting in his ironic tone. “I
      suppose you’d like to have freedom for domestic use, the sort you could
      fold up and put in your pocket.”
     </p>
<p>
      Rameyev, making no effort to disguise his desire of closing the
      conversation, rose, smiling, and stretched out his hand to Stchemilov.
    </p>
<p>
      “I must go now.”
     </p>
<p>
      Misha was about to follow him, but changed his mind and ran towards the
      river. He found his fishing-rod near the bath-house and entered the water
      up to his knees. He had long ago accustomed himself to go to the river
      when agitated by sadness or joy or when he had to think about something
      very seriously. He was a shy and self-sufficient boy and loved to be alone
      with his thoughts and his dreams. The coolness of the water running fast
      about his legs comforted him and banished evil moods. As he stood here,
      with his naked legs in the water, he became gentle and calm.
    </p>
<p>
      Elena soon came there also. She stood silently on the bank and looked at
      the water. For some reason she felt sad and wanted to cry.
    </p>
<p>
      The water glided past her tranquilly, almost noiselessly. Its surface was
      smooth—and thus it ran on.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta looked at Stchemilov with mild displeasure.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why are you so sharp, Aleksei?” she asked.
    </p>
<p>
      “You don’t like it, comrade?” he asked in return.
    </p>
<p>
      “No, I don’t like it,” said Elisaveta in simple, unmistakable tones.
    </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov did not reply at once. He grew thoughtful, then said:
    </p>
<p>
      “The abyss that separates us from your cousin is too broad. And even
      between us and your father. It is hard to come together with them. Their
      chief concern, as you very well know, is to construct a pyramid out of
      people; ours to scatter this pyramid in an even stratum over the earth.
      That’s how it is, Elizaveta.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta showed her annoyance and corrected him:
    </p>
<p>
      “<i>Elisaveta</i>. How many times have I told you?”
     </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov smiled.
    </p>
<p>
      “A lordly caprice, comrade Elisaveta. Well, as you like, though it is a
      trifle hard to pronounce. Now we would say Lizaveta.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kiril complained of his failures, of the police, of the detectives, of the
      patriots. His complaints were pitiful and depressing. He had been arrested
      and had lost his job. It was easy to see that he had suffered. The gleam
      of hunger trembled in his eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      “The police treated me most horribly,” complained Kiril, “and then there’s
      my family....”
     </p>
<p>
      After an awkward silence he continued:
    </p>
<p>
      “Not a single thing escapes them at our factory, you get humiliated at
      every step. They actually search you.”
     </p>
<p>
      Again he lapsed into silence. Again he complained:
    </p>
<p>
      “They force their way into your soul. You can’t hold private
      conversations.... They stop at nothing.”
     </p>
<p>
      He told of hunger, he told of a sick old woman. All this was very
      touching, but it had lost its freshness by constant repetition—the
      pity of it had become, as it were, stamped out. Kiril, indeed, was a
      common type, whose state of mind made him valuable as material to be used
      up at an opportune moment in the interests of a political cause.
    </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov was saying:
    </p>
<p>
      “The Black Hundred are organizing. Zherbenev is very busy at this—he’s
      one of your genuine Russians.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Kerbakh is with him—another patriot for you,” observed Kiril.
    </p>
<p>
      “The most dangerous man in our town, this Zherbenev. Vermin of the most
      foul kind,” said Stchemilov contemptuously.
    </p>
<p>
      “I am going to kill him,” said Kiril hotly.
    </p>
<p>
      To this Elisaveta said:
    </p>
<p>
      “In order to kill a man you need to believe that one man is essentially
      better or worse than another, that he is distinct from the other not
      accidentally or socially, but in the mystic sense. That is to say, murder
      only confirms inequality.”
     </p>
<p>
      “By the way, Elisaveta,” remarked Stchemilov, “we have come to talk
      business with you.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Tell me what it is,” answered Elisaveta calmly.
    </p>
<p>
      “We are expecting some comrades from Rouban within the next few days. They
      are coming to talk things over,” said Stchemilov; “but of course you know
      all that.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, I know,” said Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “We want to use the occasion,” went on Stchemilov, “to organize a mass
      meeting not far from here for our town factory folk. So here, at last, is
      your chance to appear as an orator.”
     </p>
<p>
      “How can I be of any use?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “You have the gift of expression, Elisaveta,” said Stchemilov. “You have a
      good voice, an easy flow of language, and you have a way of putting the
      case simply and clearly. It would be a sin for you not to speak.”
     </p>
<p>
      “We will bring down the Cadets<a href="#linknote-6" id="linknoteref-6" name="linknoteref-6"><small>6</small></a> a peg or two,” said Kiril in his
      bass voice.
    </p>
<p>
      “You’ll forgive Kiril, comrade Elisaveta,” said Stchemilov. “I don’t think
      he knows that your father is a Cadet. Besides, he’s a rather simple, frank
      fellow.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kiril grew red.
    </p>
<p>
      “I know so little,” said Elisaveta timidly. “What shall I talk about, and
      how?”
     </p>
<p>
      “You know enough,” said the other confidently; “more than myself and Kiril
      put together. You do things remarkably well. Everything you say is so
      clear and accurate.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What shall I talk about?”
     </p>
<p>
      “You can draw a picture of the general condition of working men,” answered
      Stchemilov, “and how capital is forging a hammer against itself and
      compelling labour to organize.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta grew red and silently inclined her head.
    </p>
<p>
      “Then it’s all settled, comrade?” asked Stchemilov.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta burst into a laugh.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, settled,” she exclaimed cheerfully.
    </p>
<p>
      It was good to hear this gravely and simply pronounced word “comrade.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0006" name="link2HCH0006"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER VI
    </h2>
<p>
      The sweet, quiet night came, and brought her enchantments. The weary din
      of day lost itself in oblivion. The clear, tranquil, anaemic moon
      encircled herself with her own radiance, basked in her own light. She
      looked at the earth and did not dissipate the mist—it was as if she
      had taken to herself all the brightness and translucence of the sun’s last
      afterglow. A calm poured itself out upon the earth and upon the water, and
      embraced every tree, every bush, every blade of grass.
    </p>
<p>
      A soothing mood took possession of Elisaveta. It struck her as strange
      that they should have quarrelled and stood facing one another like
      enemies. Why shouldn’t she love him? Why not give herself up to him,
      submit to the will of another, make it her will? Why all this noisy
      discussion, these fine, yet remote words about a struggle, about ideals?
    </p>
<p>
      Every one in the house, she thought, was tired—was it with the heat?
      With wrangling? With a secret sorrow inducing sleep, soothingness? The
      sisters went to their rooms somewhat earlier than usual. Fatigue and a
      languorous sadness oppressed them. The sisters’ bedrooms were next to each
      other, one entering the other by a wide, always open door. They could hear
      one another. The even breathing of her sleeping sister gave a poignant
      reality to the terrible world of night and slumber.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta and Elena did not converse long that night. They parted early.
      Elisaveta undressed herself, lit a candle, and began to admire herself in
      the cold, dead, indifferent mirror. Pearl-like were the moon’s reflections
      on the lines of her graceful body. Palpitating were her white girlish
      breasts, crowned by two rubies. The living, passionate form stood flaming
      and throbbing, strangely white in the tranquil rays of the moon. The
      gradual curves of the body and legs were precise and delicate. The skin
      stretched across the knees hinted at the elastic energy that it covered.
      And equally elastic and energetic were the curves of the calves and the
      feet.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta’s body flamed all over, as though a fire had penetrated the
      whole sweet, sensitive flesh; and oh, how she wished to press, to cling,
      to embrace! If he would only come! Only by day he spoke to her his
      dead-sounding words of love, kindled by the kisses of the accursed Dragon.
      Oh, if he would only come by night to the secretly flaming great Fire of
      the blossoming Flesh!
    </p>
<p>
      Did he love her? Was his a final and a single-souled love conquering by
      the eternal spirit of the divine Aphrodite? Where love is there daring
      should be also. Is love, then, gentle, meek, obedient? Is it not a flame,
      decreed to take what is its own without waiting?
    </p>
<p>
      Her eager, impatient fancies seethed. If he only had come he would have
      been a young god. But he was only a human being who bowed down before his
      idol; he was a small slave of a small demon. He did not come, he had not
      dared, he had not guessed: a dark grief came over Elisaveta from the
      secret seething of her passion.
    </p>
<p>
      As she looked at her wonderful image in the mirror, Elisaveta thought:
    </p>
<p>
      “Perhaps he is praying. The weak and the haughty—why do they pray?
      They should be taught to be joyous, to remake their religion and be the
      first in the new sect.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta could not sleep. Desire tormented her; she did not know what she
      wanted—was it to go?—to wait? She walked out on the balcony.
      The nocturnal coolness caressed her naked body. She stood there long; the
      contact of her naked feet with the warm, moist boards was pleasant. She
      looked into the pale light of the mist-wrapt garden dreaming there under
      the moon. She recalled at this moment the details of the day’s walk, and
      all that they had seen in Trirodov’s house; she recalled it all so
      clearly, with almost the vividness of a hallucination. Then a drowsiness
      crept up, seized her. And Elisaveta could not recall later how she found
      herself in her bed. It was almost as if an invisible being had carried
      her, tucked her in, and rocked her to sleep.
    </p>
<p>
      It was a restless, tormenting sleep. She saw horrible visions, nightmares.
      They were remarkably clear and real.
    </p>
<p>
      She was in a very dusty room. The air in it was stifling, it oppressed her
      breast. The walls were covered with bookcases filled with books. The
      tables were also covered with books—all new, slender, with bright
      covers. The title-pages were for some reason ponderous, terrible to look
      at. A tall, gaunt, long-haired student entered; his hair was very
      straight, his face morose and grey, he wore spectacles. He whispered:
    </p>
<p>
      “Hide them.”
     </p>
<p>
      And he placed on the table a bundle of books and pamphlets. Some one
      behind Elisaveta stretched out a hand, took the books, and thrust them
      under the table. Then came a woman student, strangely resembling the man
      student yet quite different; she was short, thick, red-cheeked,
      short-haired, cheerful, and wore pince-nez. She also brought a bundle of
      books, and said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Hide them.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta hid the books in the bookcase and was afraid of something.
    </p>
<p>
      Then came more students, working men, young women, schoolboys, military
      men, officials, and clerks; each, placing a packet of books on the table,
      whispered:
    </p>
<p>
      “Hide them.”
     </p>
<p>
      Each one slipped away. And Elisaveta went to work to hide the books. She
      put them in the table drawer, in the cupboard, under the sofas, behind the
      doors, and in the fireplace. But the pile of books on the table grew and
      grew; more and more persistent became the whisper:
    </p>
<p>
      “Hide them.”
     </p>
<p>
      There was no hiding-place left, and yet the books were still being brought
      in—there was no end to them. Everywhere books—they were
      pressing on her breast....
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta awakened. Some one’s face was bending over her. The bedcover
      slipped from her handsome body. Elena was whispering something. Elisaveta
      asked her in a drowsy voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Did I wake you?”
     </p>
<p>
      “You cried out so,” said Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve had such a stupid dream,” whispered Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      She went to sleep again, and again the same hoard of books. There were so
      many books that even the window-sills were piled up with them, and a dim
      and dusty gleam of light barely penetrated. An ominous silence tormented
      her. Behind the counter at her side stood a student and two boys,
      strangely erect; they were pale, and seemed to wait for something. All at
      once the door opened noiselessly. Many men entered, making a loud noise
      with their boots—first a police official, then another, then a
      detective in gold-rimmed spectacles, a house-porter, another house-porter,
      a muzhik, a policeman, another muzhik, another house-porter. More and more
      came; they filled the room, and still they came—huge, moody, silent
      fellows. Elisaveta felt it stifling; she awoke.
    </p>
<p>
      Again she dropped into sleep, again she was tormented by horrible visions
      oppressing the breast.
    </p>
<p>
      She dreamt that the house was being searched.
    </p>
<p>
      “An illegal book!” exclaimed a detective, looking ominously at her as he
      put a book on the table.
    </p>
<p>
      The pile of the illegal books on the table began to grow. They were
      examined and shaken. A police official sat down to make out a list. The
      pen ran on, but there was not enough paper.
    </p>
<p>
      “More paper!” cried the official.
    </p>
<p>
      Page was filled after page. The official mocked at her, threatened her
      with a revolver.
    </p>
<p>
      Once more she awoke, once more she fell asleep. And still another dream.
    </p>
<p>
      A small, frail schoolmaster with a squeaky voice came. Then another, a
      third, and still others—an endless flock of peaceful men with wails
      of revolt.
    </p>
<p>
      And yet another dream.
    </p>
<p>
      The city square was bathed in the bright sunlight. A muzhik appeared and
      shouted at the top of his voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Hey there! Stand up for your gov’r-ment, and for holy Russia!”
     </p>
<p>
      Another muzhik came in answer to his shout, then a third and a fourth.
      Slowly and steadily the crowd grew, the turmoil increased. A muzhik in a
      white apron wearing a conspicuous emblem<a href="#linknote-7" id="linknoteref-7" name="linknoteref-7"><small>7</small></a> made his way
      through the crowd and, screwing up his mouth, cried like a madman:
    </p>
<p>
      “For Rush-ya, I say, fel-lows, kill ‘em!”
     </p>
<p>
      He threw himself on Elisaveta and began to strangle her.
    </p>
<p>
      She awoke.
    </p>
<p>
      Again there was a dark, terrible dream. Nothing as yet was to be seen, it
      was hard to tell what was happening. But fear filled the intense darkness.
      Dark figures seemed to throng in it. The darkness cleared a little, the
      atmosphere became ominously grey. A narrow courtyard slowly outlined
      itself, flanked by high walls with windows closely intersected by bars.
      Her heart whispered audibly:
    </p>
<p>
      “A prison. A prison courtyard.”
     </p>
<p>
      Out of a narrow door prisoners were being conducted into the still dark
      courtyard on a cold early morning in winter. They walked in single file—a
      soldier, a prisoner, a soldier, a prisoner, a soldier—there seemed
      to be no end to it; there was a steady shuffling of feet across the
      courtyard. A small gate opened in the wall with a creaking sound. All
      walked through it. And beyond the wall Elisaveta already caught a glimpse
      of a flat, endless field of snow, and of a whole row of gallows that
      stretched into the invisible distance. They were approaching these nearer
      and nearer—to meet their fate.
    </p>
<p>
      She could not remember how it happened, but she also walked with them. A
      soldier strode in front of her and in front of the soldier was a boy.
      Though the boy had his back to her she recognized him—it was Misha.
      Terror paralysed her tongue—when she tried to cry out she could not
      find her voice. Terror fettered her feet—when she tried to run she
      remained rooted to the spot. Terror gripped her arms—when she tried
      to lift them they hung helplessly at her sides.
    </p>
<p>
      People were being hanged at the nearest gallows and the prisoners had to
      walk past the hanged ones to the gallows beyond. Misha was being hanged,
      but he broke loose. He was hanged again, and again he broke loose. This
      happened an endless number of times, and each time he broke loose.
    </p>
<p>
      She could see a furious face and the grey bristles of trimmed moustaches.
      She could hear the malignant cry:
    </p>
<p>
      “We must finish him off!”
     </p>
<p>
      A shot was fired; there was a low, dull discharge: the boy fell and began
      to toss on the ground. Another shot—the boy kept on tossing. The
      shots came faster—but the boy was still alive.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta awoke; this time she did not go to sleep again. Her heart beat
      half with pain, half with joy, because it was but a dream—but a
      dream! Her heart was bright with exultant joy.
    </p>
<p>
      The golden arrows of the yet quiet and gentle Dragon fell softly with
      sidelong glances. Evidently it was still early. In the distance Elisaveta
      could hear the sound of a horn and the lowing of cows. The bedroom walls
      were tinged with rose light. The early light stole in through the windows
      and messaged an altogether new, better day. A refreshing breeze blew in
      through the open window, the twitter of birds also entered, the air
      resounded with early morning joy.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta was soon aware that Elena was also awake.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0007" name="link2HCH0007"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER VII
    </h2>
<p>
      Both sisters had slept badly that night. Elisaveta was worn out by
      nightmares, while Elena woke several times and went to her. Both felt the
      sweet after-dizziness of sleep suddenly cut short by the Dragon’s sickles.
      Their memories pursued one another in a confused, vivid flock. They began
      to recall the circumstances of yesterday’s visit. A secret agitation, akin
      to shame, stole over them. Little by little they conquered this feeling
      during the day. Alone again, they discussed what they had seen at
      Trirodov’s. A strange forgetfulness came upon them. The details of the
      visit grew more vague the more they tried to recall them. They found
      themselves in constant disagreement, and corrected one another. It might
      have been a dream. Now it seemed one, now the other. Was it reality or a
      dream? Where is the border-line? Whether life be a sweet or a bitter
      dream, it passes by like a swift vision!
    </p>
<p>
      Three days passed by. Again the day was quiet and clear, again the high
      Dragon smiled his malignant, excessively bright smile. He counted, as he
      rose, his livid seconds, his flaming minutes; and he let fall upon the
      earth, with a scarcely perceptible echo, his lead-heavy but transparent
      hours. It was three o’clock in the afternoon; they had just finished
      luncheon. The Rameyevs and the Matovs were at home. Again Elisaveta
      wrangled with Piotr and, as before, the discussion was long, heated and
      discordant—every one left the table flustered and depressed; the
      hopeless confusion of it all deeply affected even the usually composed
      Miss Harrison.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters were left by themselves. They went out on the lower balcony
      and pretended to read. They appeared to be waiting for something. This
      waiting made their hearts beat fast under their heaving breasts.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta, letting the book fall upon her knees, was the first to break
      the heavy silence.
    </p>
<p>
      “I think he is coming to-day.”
     </p>
<p>
      The breeze blew at that moment, there was a rustle in the foliage and a
      little bird suddenly began to chirp away somewhere—and it seemed as
      if the depressed garden were glad because of these lively, resonant,
      quickly uttered words.
    </p>
<p>
      “Who?” asked Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      The insincerity of her question made her flush quite suddenly. She knew
      very well whom Elisaveta meant. The latter glanced at her and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Trirodov, of course. It is strange that we should be waiting for him.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I think he promised to come,” said Elena indecisively.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” answered Elisaveta, “I think he said something at that strange
      mirror.”
     </p>
<p>
      “It was earlier,” observed Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, I am mixing it all up,” said Elisaveta. “I don’t understand how I
      could forget so quickly.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I too am tangling things up badly,” confessed Elena, astonished at
      herself. “I feel very tired, I don’t know why.”
     </p>
<p>
      The soft noise of wheels over a sandy road grew closer and closer. At last
      a light trap, drawn by a horse in English harness, could be seen turning
      into the alley of birches and stopping before the house. The sisters rose
      nervously. Their faces wore their habitually pleasant smiles and their
      hands did not tremble.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov gave the reins to Kirsha, who drove away.
    </p>
<p>
      The meeting proved an embarrassing one. The sisters’ agitation was evident
      in their polite, empty phrases. They entered the drawing-room. Presently
      Rameyev, accompanied by the Matov brothers, came in to welcome the guest.
      There was the usual exchange of compliments, of meaningless phrases—as
      everywhere, as always.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr was uneasy and hostile. He spoke abruptly and with evident
      unwillingness. Misha looked on with curiosity. He liked Trirodov—he
      had already heard something about him which assured pleasant relations
      between them.
    </p>
<p>
      The conversation developed rapidly and politely. Not a word was said about
      the sisters’ visit to Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “We’ve heard a great deal about you,” began Rameyev, “I’m glad to know
      you.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov smiled, and his smile seemed slightly derisive. Elisaveta
      remarked:
    </p>
<p>
      “I suppose you think our being glad to see you merely a polite phrase.”
     </p>
<p>
      There was sharpness in her voice. Elisaveta, realizing this, suddenly
      flushed. Rameyev looked at her in astonishment.
    </p>
<p>
      “No, I don’t think that,” put in Trirodov. “There’s real pleasure in
      meeting.”
     </p>
<p>
      “That’s the usual thing to say in polite society,” said Piotr quietly.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov glanced at him with a smile and turned to Rameyev.
    </p>
<p>
      “I say it in all sincerity, I am glad to have made your acquaintance. I
      live very much alone and so am all the more glad of the fortunate
      circumstance that has brought me here on a matter of business.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Business?” asked Rameyev in astonishment.
    </p>
<p>
      “I can put the matter in a few words,” said Trirodov. “I wish to extend my
      estate.”
     </p>
<p>
      There was a tinge of sadness in Rameyev’s answer:
    </p>
<p>
      “You have bought the better part of the Prosianiya Meadows.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov said:
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s not quite large enough. I should like to acquire the rest of it—for
      my colony.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I shouldn’t like to let the rest go,” remarked Rameyev. “It belongs to
      Piotr and Misha.”
     </p>
<p>
      “As far as it concerns me,” put in Piotr, “I’d sell my share with the
      greatest pleasure before those ‘comrade’ fellows take it from me for
      nothing.”
     </p>
<p>
      Misha was silent, but it was evident that the thought of selling his
      native soil was distasteful to him. He seemed on the point of bursting
      into tears.
    </p>
<p>
      “In my opinion,” observed Rameyev, “the land needn’t be sold. I shouldn’t
      advise it. I wouldn’t think of selling Misha’s share until he came of age—and
      I shouldn’t advise you to sell yours either, Piotr.”
     </p>
<p>
      Misha, gladdened, glanced gratefully at Rameyev, who continued:
    </p>
<p>
      “I can direct you to another plot of land which happens to be on sale. I
      hope it will suit your needs.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov thanked him.
    </p>
<p>
      His educational institution now became the topic of conversation.
    </p>
<p>
      “Your school, of course, brings you into contact with the Headmaster of
      the National Schools. How do you manage to get along with him?” asked
      Rameyev.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov smiled contemptuously.
    </p>
<p>
      “Not at all,” he said.
    </p>
<p>
      “A clumsy person, this fellow with his feminine voice,” went on Rameyev.
      “He’s an ambitious, cold-blooded man. He’s likely to do you an injury.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’m used to it,” answered Trirodov calmly. “We are all used to it.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They might close your school,” suggested Piotr in a tone of sharp
      derision.
    </p>
<p>
      “And again they might not,” asserted Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “But if they should?” persisted Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      “Let us hope for the best,” said Rameyev.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta looked affectionately at her father. But Trirodov said quietly
      in his own defence:
    </p>
<p>
      “The school might be closed, but it is hard to prevent any one from living
      on the soil and running a farm. If the school should cease being a mere
      school and become an educational farm, it would succeed in replacing the
      large farms as they are now run by their proprietors.”
     </p>
<p>
      “But that is Utopia,” said Piotr in some irritation.
    </p>
<p>
      “Very well, then, we’ll establish Utopia,” said Trirodov, unruffled.
    </p>
<p>
      “But as a beginning you hope to destroy what exists?” asked Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why?” exclaimed Trirodov, astonished.
    </p>
<p>
      Strangely agitated, Piotr said:
    </p>
<p>
      “The comrades’ proposed division of land, if carried into force, would
      lead to a crushing of culture and science.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I don’t understand this alarm for science and culture,” replied Trirodov.
      “Both one and the other are sufficiently strong to stand up for
      themselves.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Nevertheless,” argued Piotr, “monuments of civilization are being
      demolished by this <i>Kham</i><a href="#linknote-8" id="linknoteref-8" name="linknoteref-8"><small>8</small></a> who is trying to replace us.”
     </p>
<p>
      “It is not our monuments of civilization alone that are being destroyed,”
       retorted Trirodov patiently. “This is very sad, of course, and proper
      measures should be taken. But the sufferings of the people are so
      great.... The value of human life is, after all, greater than the value of
      such monuments.”
     </p>
<p>
      In this peculiarly Russian manner the conversation quickly passed on to
      general themes. Trirodov, who took a large share in it, spoke with a calm
      assurance. They listened to him with deep attention.
    </p>
<p>
      Of his five auditors only Piotr was not captivated. He was tormented by a
      feeling of hostility to Trirodov. He glanced at Trirodov with suspicion
      and hate. He was exasperated by Trirodov’s confident tone and facile
      speech. Piotr’s remarks addressed to the visitor were often caustic, even
      coarse. Rameyev looked vexed at Piotr now and then, but Trirodov appeared
      not to notice his sallies, and was simple, tranquil, and courteous. In the
      end Piotr was compelled to restrain himself and abandon his sharp manner.
      Then he grew silent altogether. After Trirodov’s departure Piotr left the
      room. It was evident that he did not wish to join in any discussion about
      the visitor.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0008" name="link2HCH0008"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER VIII
    </h2>
<p>
      The day was hot, sultry, windless—helplessly prostrate before the
      arrowed glances of the infuriated Dragon. A number of city folk sought
      coolness on the float, as the buffet at the steamboat-landing was called
      in Skorodozh. It was less oppressive under the canvas roof of the float,
      where at intervals gusts of breeze came from the river.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr and Misha were in town to do some shopping. They stopped on the
      float to get a glass of lemonade. A steamboat had just come in below them.
      It began to unload the passengers and wares it brought from neighbouring
      manufacturing towns. It was the boat’s last stopping-point, the river
      higher up being too shallow. For a while there was much bustle and noise
      on the float. The little tables were soon occupied by townsfolk and new
      arrivals, chiefly officials and landlords. They drank wine and talked
      loudly, though peacefully; they shouted in the provincial manner, and it
      was easy to hear that many of the conversations touched more or less on
      political themes.
    </p>
<p>
      Two men who sat at one table were in evident agreement, yet spoke in tones
      of anger. They were the retired District Attorney Kerbakh and the retired
      Colonel Zherbenev, both large land-proprietors and patriots—members
      of the Union of Russian People.<a href="#linknote-9" id="linknoteref-9" name="linknoteref-9"><small>9</small></a> Their speech was loud and
      vehement, and interpolated with such strange words and phrases as
      “treachery,” “sedition,” “hang them,” “wipe them out,” “give it to them.”
     </p>
<p>
      Nikolai Ilyitch Kerbakh was a small, thin, puny-looking man. The long,
      drooping moustache on his otherwise clean-shaven face seemed to be there
      merely to add to its already savage appearance. He rocked in his chair as
      he lazily stretched himself. His large coat hung about his shoulders like
      a bag, his highly coloured waistcoat was unbuttoned, his string necktie
      hung loose, half undone. Altogether he had the look of a man who would not
      let such small trifles stand in the way of his comfort. Near him,
      fidgeting restlessly in his chair, was his son, a slobbering,
      black-toothed youngster of eight, with a flagging, carmine-red under-lip.
    </p>
<p>
      Andrey Lavrentyevitch Zherbenev, a tall, lank man with an important air,
      sat motionless and erect as though he were nailed to his chair, and
      surveyed those round him with a stern glance. His white linen coat, with
      all its buttons fastened, sat on him as on a bronze idol.
    </p>
<p>
      “In everything, I say, the parents are to blame,” continued Kerbakh in the
      same savage voice as before. “It is necessary to instil the right ideas
      from very childhood. Now look at my children....”
     </p>
<p>
      And he shouted at his son with unnecessary loudness, though the two sat
      almost nudging each other:
    </p>
<p>
      “Sergey!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yeth?” lisped the slobbering boy.
    </p>
<p>
      “Stand up before me and answer.”
     </p>
<p>
      The youngster slipped off his chair, stretched himself smartly to his full
      height in front of his father, and lisped again:
    </p>
<p>
      “Yeth, father?”
     </p>
<p>
      And he surveyed those sitting at the other tables with a quick, sly look.
    </p>
<p>
      “What should be done with the enemies of the Tsar and the Fatherland?”
       asked Kerbakh.
    </p>
<p>
      “They should be destroyed!” answered the boy alertly.
    </p>
<p>
      “And afterwards?” continued his father.
    </p>
<p>
      The boy quickly repeated the words he had studied:
    </p>
<p>
      “And afterwards the foul corpses of the vile enemies of the Fatherland
      should be thrown on the dunghill.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kerbakh and Zherbenev laughed gleefully.
    </p>
<p>
      “That describes them—foul carrion, that’s what they are!” said
      Zherbenev in a hoarse voice.
    </p>
<p>
      A new-comer at the next table, a stranger apparently to those present, was
      giving an order for a bottle of beer. Of middle age and medium height, he
      was stout, or rather flabby; he had small glittering eyes; and his dress
      had seen much wear. Kerbakh and Zherbenev gave him an occasional passing
      glance, not of a very friendly nature. As though they took it for granted
      that the stranger held antagonistic views, they increased the vehemence of
      their speeches and spoke more and more furiously of agitators and of
      Little Mother Russia, and mentioned, by the way, a number of local
      undesirables, Trirodov among them.
    </p>
<p>
      The new-comer scrutinized the two speakers for a long time. It was evident
      that the name of Trirodov, often repeated in Kerbakh’s remarks, aroused an
      intense interest, even agitation, in the stranger. His fixed scrutiny of
      his two neighbours at last attracted their attention and they exchanged
      annoyed glances.
    </p>
<p>
      Then the stranger ventured to join in their conversation.
    </p>
<p>
      “I beg your pardon,” he said, “unless I am mistaken, you were speaking of
      Mr. Trirodov—am I right?”
     </p>
<p>
      “My dear sir, you....” began Kerbakh.
    </p>
<p>
      The new-comer immediately jumped to his feet and began to apologize
      profusely.
    </p>
<p>
      “May I impose upon your good nature to forgive my impertinent curiosity. I
      am Ostrov, the actor—tragedian. You may have heard of me?”
     </p>
<p>
      “For the first time,” said Kerbakh surlily.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve never heard the name,” said Zherbenev.
    </p>
<p>
      The stranger smiled pleasantly, as if he had been commended, and continued
      to speak without showing the slightest embarrassment:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well—er—I’ve played in many cities. I’m just passing through
      here. I’m on my way to attend to some personal business in the Rouban
      Government. And you just happened to mention a name very familiar to me.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kerbakh and Zherbenev exchanged glances. Malignant thoughts about Trirodov
      again took possession of their minds. Ostrov continued:
    </p>
<p>
      “I had no suspicion that Trirodov lived here. He is a very old and
      intimate acquaintance of mine. I might say we are friends.”
     </p>
<p>
      “So-o,” said Zherbenev severely, glancing at Ostrov with disapproval.
    </p>
<p>
      Something in Ostrov’s voice and manner aroused their antagonism. His
      glance was certainly impudent. Indeed his words and his whole demeanour
      were provokingly arrogant. But it was impossible to be rude with him. His
      words were proper enough in themselves.
    </p>
<p>
      “We haven’t met for some years,” Ostrov went on. “How does he manage to
      get on?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Mr. Trirodov is to all appearances a rich man,” said Kerbakh unwillingly.
    </p>
<p>
      “A rich man? That’s agreeable news. In fact, this wealth of Mr. Trirodov’s
      is of comparatively recent origin. I’m quite sure of that. Of recent
      origin, I assure you,” repeated Ostrov, giving a sly wink.
    </p>
<p>
      “And not of the cleanest?” asked Kerbakh.
    </p>
<p>
      He winked at Zherbenev. The latter made a grimace and chuckled. Ostrov
      looked cautiously at Kerbakh.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why do you assume so?” he asked. “No-o, I shouldn’t say that. Quite
      clean. Indeed, I can assure you of its clean origin,” he repeated with
      peculiar emphasis.
    </p>
<p>
      Misha looked with curiosity at the speakers. He wished to hear something
      about Trirodov. But Piotr quickly paid his bill and rose to go. Kerbakh
      tried to hold him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Here’s a friend of your friend Trirodov,” he said.
    </p>
<p>
      “I haven’t yet had time to become a friend of Trirodov’s,” Piotr answered
      sharply, “and I don’t intend to. As for his friends, nearly every one has
      his more or less strange acquaintance.”
     </p>
<p>
      And he quickly left with Misha. Ostrov glanced after him with a smile and
      said:
    </p>
<p>
      “A grave young man.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Mr. Trirodov has bought some land belonging to him and his brother,”
       explained Kerbakh.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr Matov’s hostility to Trirodov evidently had its roots in the chance
      circumstance that Trirodov had bought the house and part of the estate,
      the Prosianiya Meadows, which formerly belonged to the paternal Matov.
    </p>
<p>
      Many in the town of Skorodozh remembered very well Dmitry Alexandrovitch
      Matov, the father of Piotr and Mikhail Matov. He had been a member of the
      local District Council for a single term, and was not chosen again. He
      could not hide his connexions and his affairs, and lost his reputation,
      though the scandal was hushed up. This happened when times were still
      quiet. During his term of office he paid visits to the governor more often
      than necessary.
    </p>
<p>
      About the same time, in response to some one’s complaint, the President of
      the District Council had been dispatched “in administrative order” to the
      Olonetsk Government. There were dark rumours about Matov. At the next
      election a few votes were given in his favour, but not enough. He ceased
      to have any connexion with the District Council.
    </p>
<p>
      Matov’s money affairs were in a bad state. He led a heedless life,
      dissipated, and roamed from place to place. Bold, headstrong,
      unrestrained, he lived only for his own pleasure. More than once he
      squandered all—to the last farthing. But invariably he found sudden
      means again, no one knew how, and again he would lead a dissipated, gay,
      profligate life. His estate was mortgaged and re-mortgaged. His relations
      with the peasants began to be unbearable. Their own difficulties and his
      temper led to constant disputes. A reign of spite began: the cattle were
      driven into the corn, some of the buildings were set afire, some of the
      peasants were gaoled.
    </p>
<p>
      The Prosianiya Meadows more than once passed from a period of lavish
      prosperity to a state of complete and hopeless poverty. This was because
      Matov was lucky enough to fall heir to several inheritances. Not only did
      people say that luck was on his side, but they also hinted at forged
      wills, strangled aunts, and poisoned children. Dark adventures of some
      sort enriched and ruined Matov by turns. It was all like some dubious,
      fantastic game of chance....
    </p>
<p>
      During the lean days the ingeniously constructed buildings on his estate
      were in a state of disrepair, the live stock showed decrease, the wheat
      was got rid of quickly and cheaply, the wood was sold for a trifling sum
      for lumber, the labourers were not paid for the work they had done. On the
      other hand, during prosperous days, following the death of some relative,
      things used to pick up in a marvellous way. Companies of carpenters,
      masons, roofers, and painters would make their appearance. The owner’s
      fancies were swiftly and energetically carried out. Money was spent
      lavishly, without reckoning the cost.
    </p>
<p>
      Dmitry Alexandrovitch Matov was already forty years old, and many dark,
      mad misdeeds weighed on his shoulders, when, quite unexpectedly to all and
      possibly to himself, he married a young girl with excellent means and a
      dark past. There was a report that she had been the mistress of a
      dignitary, who had begun to grow weary of her. She managed, none the less,
      to keep up her connexions and to collect capital. She would have been very
      beautiful but for a strange stain—as from fire—on her left
      cheek, which disfigured her. This spot was very conspicuous and completely
      marred the beauty of her face.
    </p>
<p>
      Very shortly a fierce hatred arose between husband and wife, no one knew
      why. The gossips said he was disappointed in his expectations, while she
      had found out about his mistresses and revels and had got wind of the dark
      rumours about his inheritances. The quarrels grew more frequent. Quite
      often he left his home, and always suddenly. Once he took all valuables
      with him and decamped, leaving with his wife only his mortgaged estate,
      his debts, and their two sons. A short time afterwards all sorts of
      reports came in about him. Some had seen him in Odessa, others in
      Manchuria. Later even rumours ceased.
    </p>
<p>
      Then came the unexpected news of his death in a remote southern town. Its
      cause remained unknown. Even his body had not been found. It was only
      certain that he had been lured into an empty, uninhabited house—there
      all trace of him was lost.
    </p>
<p>
      Matov’s widow soon died from a sudden, sharp illness. Her sons remained in
      the house of Rameyev. He became their guardian.
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s an agitator and a conspirator,” said Zherbenev sharply.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov smiled.
    </p>
<p>
      “All the same, I must stand up for my friend. Pardon me if I ask the
      question: are these calumnies against my friend actuated by patriotic
      reasons? Of course, from the most honourable impulses!”
     </p>
<p>
      “I do not take up my time with calumnies,” said Zherbenev dryly.
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh, I beg your pardon. But I’ll not intrude upon you any longer. I’m very
      grateful for the pleasant conversation and for the interesting
      information.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov left them. Kerbakh and Zherbenev quietly discussed him.
    </p>
<p>
      “What a strange-looking man! Quite a beast!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, what a character! I shouldn’t like to meet him alone in the woods.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Our poet and doctor of chemistry has fine friends, I must say!”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0009" name="link2HCH0009"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER IX
    </h2>
<p>
      Elisaveta and Elena were walking again on a path close to the road that
      connected the Prosianiya Meadows and the Rameyev estate. The sisters were
      glad that it was so still and deserted around them and that the turmoil of
      life seemed so remote from them. Life with all its bustling movement
      seemed indeed distant, and it was a joy to dismiss all its conditions and
      proprieties from their minds and to walk with bare feet upon the soft
      ground, the sand, the clay, and the grass; it filled their hearts with a
      simple, childlike, and chaste delight.
    </p>
<p>
      Both were dressed alike, in short frocks; there was a sash raised rather
      high at the waist, two other bands crossed each other at the breast, the
      sleeves were cut quite short at the shoulders.
    </p>
<p>
      They walked on farther, and their eyes contemplated gaily and
      affectionately the half-hidden depths of the valleys, the woods, and the
      thickets. A simple-hearted devotion to this lovable nature possessed them—it
      was a sweet and tender devotion. It struck a deep note in Elisaveta, who
      was in a mood of expectancy. If only she could have met some one deserving
      of her love whom she might place at the crossings of all earthly and
      heavenly roads, and to whom she might do obeisance!
    </p>
<p>
      This tender devotion aroused young virginal intoxication in Elena also.
      She felt herself in love—not with any one in particular, but with
      everything: as the air loves in the springtime, kissing all in its
      gladness; as a stream’s currents love when they brush caressingly past
      boys’ and girls’ pink knees—such were the currents of the stream
      that suddenly became visible, winding its way among the green in the
      direction of the River Skorodyen, into which it emptied itself.
    </p>
<p>
      The bridge was some way off, and so the sisters waded the stream. There
      was the delicious coolness of the water round their knees. They remained
      standing on the bank and admired the porcupines of sand, studded sparsely
      with tall blades of grass as with spines; also the round pebbles made
      smooth by the water. Their cooled legs felt for some time afterwards the
      sensation of the water’s loving caresses.
    </p>
<p>
      Just as the running water falls in love with all beauty that is immersed
      in it, so Elena fell in love with all that her vision evoked for her.
    </p>
<p>
      Most of all her love was directed towards Piotr. His love for Elisaveta
      wounded her with a sweet pain.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters descended into the hollow near Trirodov’s colony, ascended it
      again to the other side, walked along the already familiar path, and
      opened the gate—this time it yielded without effort. They entered.
      Soon they saw a lake before them. The children and their instructresses
      were bathing. There was a spirit of buoyancy in the brown nakedness
      disporting itself in the buoyant waters—buoyant were the splashes,
      the laughter, and the outcries!
    </p>
<p>
      The children and the instructresses walked out of the water upon the dry
      ground and ran naked upon the sand. Their legs, bare and sunburnt, seemed
      white in the green grass, like young birch-saplings growing out of the
      earth.
    </p>
<p>
      They suddenly caught sight of the sisters, formed a ring of beautiful wet
      bodies around them, and twirled in a circle at a fast, furious pace. The
      discarded clothes that lay there close by seemed unnecessary to the
      sisters at that moment. What, after all, was more beautiful and lovely
      than the nude, eternal body?
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters learnt afterwards that they more often walked about naked here
      than in their clothes.
    </p>
<p>
      The radiantly sad Nadezhda said to them:
    </p>
<p>
      “To lull the beast to sleep and to awaken the human being—that is
      the reason of our nakedness.”
     </p>
<p>
      The dark, black-haired Maria said with ecstasy:
    </p>
<p>
      “We have bared our feet in order to come in closer contact with the earth;
      we have become simple and happy, like people in the first garden. We have
      discarded our clothes in order to come closer to the elements. Caressed by
      these, clothed by the fire of the sun’s rays, we have discovered the human
      being in us. This being is not the uncouth beast thirsting for blood, or
      the townsman counting his profits—it is the human being, clean in
      body and alive with love.”
     </p>
<p>
      So natural, indispensable, and inevitable seemed the nakedness of these
      young, beautiful bodies that it appeared rather stupid to put on one’s
      clothes afterwards. The sisters joined in with the naked dancers, and went
      into the water and lay on the grass under the trees. It was pleasant to
      feel the beauty, the grace, and the agility of their bodies among these
      other twirling, beautiful, strong bodies.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta’s observant glance detected two types among the girl
      instructresses. There were the rapturous ones and the dissembling ones.
    </p>
<p>
      The rapturous ones gave themselves up with a bacchic joy to a life lived
      in the embrace of chaste nature: they fervently carried out all the rites
      of the colony, joyously divested themselves of all fear and shame, made
      great efforts and self-denials; and they laughed and they flamed, overcome
      by a passionate thirst of noble actions and of love—a thirst which
      not all the waters of this poor earth can quench. Among this number were
      the sad Nadezhda and the ecstatic Maria.
    </p>
<p>
      The others, the dissembling ones, were those who had sold their time and
      had parted with all their habits, inclinations, and proprieties for money.
      They pretended that they loved children, simple life, and bodily beauty.
      They did not find it hard to dissemble, for the others served them as
      excellent models.
    </p>
<p>
      This time the sisters were shown the buildings of the colony, or at least
      as much of them as they could see in an hour, and all sorts of things made
      by the children—books and pictures—things that belonged to
      this or that child. They were shown the fruit-orchard and the garden-beds,
      above which the bees buzzed; and the air was fresh with the honeyed aroma
      of flowers half lost in the tender softness of profuse grasses.
    </p>
<p>
      But the sisters soon left.
    </p>
<p>
      They had intended to go home, but somehow they lost their way among the
      paths and found themselves in sight of Trirodov’s house. Elisaveta espied
      the high turrets rising above the white wall and recalled Trirodov’s
      neither young nor handsome face: she became suffused with a sweet passion,
      as with a rich wine—but it was an emotion not free from pain.
    </p>
<p>
      Before they realized it they were quite close to the white wall, near the
      ponderous closed gates. The small gate was open. A quiet, white boy was
      looking at the sisters through the crevice with an inviting glance. The
      sisters exchanged irresolute glances.
    </p>
<p>
      “Shall we go in, Vetochka<a href="#linknote-10" id="linknoteref-10" name="linknoteref-10"><small>10</small></a>?” asked Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, let’s go in,” said Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters entered and found themselves in the garden. They found old
      Elikonida at the entrance. She was sitting on the bench near the small
      gate and was mumbling something slowly and indistinctly. Evidently no one
      was there to listen to her. Perhaps the old woman was talking to herself.
    </p>
<p>
      Old Elikonida was first engaged to nurse Kirsha; now she carried out the
      duties of a housekeeper. She had always been austere and never wasted a
      word in speaking with people. The sisters tried to draw her into
      conversation; they wanted to ask her things, about the ways of the house,
      the habits of Trirodov—they were such inquisitive girls! Elena asked
      many questions, although Elisaveta tried to restrain her; but they found
      out nothing. The old woman looked past the sisters and mumbled in answer
      to all questions:
    </p>
<p>
      “I know what I know. I have seen what I have seen.”
     </p>
<p>
      The quiet children approached them. They stood motionless and inanimate in
      the shade of the old trees, and looked at the sisters with a fixed,
      expressionless stare. The sisters felt uncomfortable and made haste to
      depart. They could hear behind them the austere mumbling of Elikonida:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve seen what I’ve seen.”
     </p>
<p>
      And the quiet children laughed their quiet, quiet laughter, which was
      truly like the sudden rustle of autumn leaves all aflutter in the air.
    </p>
<p>
      The sisters walked home silently. They found the right path and walked
      without blundering. The evening darkness was coming on. They made haste.
      The warm, damp earth clung to their feet and seemed to hinder their
      movements.
    </p>
<p>
      They were not far from their own house when they suddenly came upon Ostrov
      in the woods. He seemed to be on the look-out for something as he walked.
      When he saw the sisters he turned aside and stood behind the trees; then
      he strode forward quickly and faced them with an unexpected suddenness
      that made Elena shudder and Elisaveta frown. Ostrov bowed to them with
      derisive politeness and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “May I ask you something, fair ladies?”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta surveyed him calmly and said without haste:
    </p>
<p>
      “What is it?”
     </p>
<p>
      Elena was silent with fear.
    </p>
<p>
      “Are you taking a walk?” asked Ostrov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” answered Elisaveta briefly.
    </p>
<p>
      “Mr. Trirodov’s house is somewhere hereabouts, unless I’m mistaken,” said
      Ostrov, half questioningly.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, you’ll find it by following the direction from which we came,”
       replied Elena.
    </p>
<p>
      She wanted to conquer her fear. Ostrov winked at her insolently and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Thank you most humbly. And who may you be?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Perhaps it is not necessary that you should know,” replied Elisaveta with
      a half-question.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov burst into laughter and said with unpleasant familiarity:
    </p>
<p>
      “It may not be necessary, but it would be interesting.”
     </p>
<p>
      The sisters walked on rapidly, but he did not desist. They thought him
      repulsive. There was something alarming in his obtrusiveness.
    </p>
<p>
      “You evidently live hereabouts, fair ladies,” continued Ostrov; “I will
      therefore venture to ask you what you know about Mr. Trirodov, who
      interests me immensely.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elena laughed, perhaps somewhat dissemblingly, in order to hide her
      agitation and fear.
    </p>
<p>
      “Perhaps we don’t live hereabouts,” she said.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov whistled.
    </p>
<p>
      “Very likely, isn’t it, that you’ve come all the way from Moscow with your
      bare little feet,” he shouted angrily.
    </p>
<p>
      “We cannot tell you anything that can interest you,” said Elena coldly.
      “You had better apply to him personally. It would be more proper.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov again burst into a sarcastic laugh and exclaimed:
    </p>
<p>
      “I can’t deny that that would be proper, my handsome barefoot one. But
      suppose he’s very busy, eh? How, then, would you advise me to get this
      interesting information I want?”
     </p>
<p>
      The sisters were silent and walked on rapidly. Ostrov persisted:
    </p>
<p>
      “You are of his colony? Unless I’m mistaken you are instructresses there.
      As far as one could judge from your light dresses and your contempt of
      footwear, I think I’m not mistaken, eh? Tell me, it’s an amusing life
      there, isn’t it?”
     </p>
<p>
      “No,” said Elisaveta, “we are not instructresses and we do not live
      there.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What a pity!” said Ostrov incredulously. “I might have told you something
      about Mr. Trirodov.”
     </p>
<p>
      He looked at the sisters attentively. They were silent.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve got together all sorts of information here and elsewhere,” he went
      on. “Curious things they tell about him, very curious indeed. And where
      did he get his money? In general there are many suspicious circumstances
      about his life.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Suspicious for whom?” asked Elena. “And what affair is it of ours?”
     </p>
<p>
      “What affair is it of yours, my charming maidens?” repeated Ostrov after
      her. “I have a well-founded suspicion that you are acquainted with Mr.
      Trirodov, and I therefore hope that you’ll tell me something about him.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You had better not hope,” said Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “And why not?” observed Ostrov in a familiar tone. “He’s an old
      acquaintance of mine. In years gone by we lived, drank, and roamed
      together. And quite suddenly I lost sight of him, and now quite as
      suddenly I’ve found him again. Naturally, I’m interested. As an old
      friend, you see!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Now, look here,” said Elisaveta, “we do not wish to converse with you.
      You had better go where you were going. We know nothing that would
      interest you and we have nothing to say to you.”
     </p>
<p>
      “So that’s it!” said Ostrov, with an insolent smile. “And now, my beauty,
      I’d better tell you that you’re expressing yourself a little carelessly.
      Suppose I whistled suddenly, eh?”
     </p>
<p>
      “What for?” asked Elisaveta, astonished.
    </p>
<p>
      “What for-r? Well, some one may come out to my whistle.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What then?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      After a short silence Ostrov resumed his threatening tone:
    </p>
<p>
      “You may be asked to give a few details about what Mr. Trirodov is doing
      behind his walls.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Nonsense!” said Elisaveta in vexation.
    </p>
<p>
      “In any case, I’m only joking,” said Ostrov, suddenly changing his tone.
    </p>
<p>
      He was listening intently. Some one was coming towards them. The sisters
      recognized Piotr and walked quickly to meet him. From their haste and
      flustered manner Piotr understood that the man was distasteful to them. He
      eyed him fixedly and recalled where he had met him, whereupon he frowned
      and asked the sisters:
    </p>
<p>
      “Who is this?”
     </p>
<p>
      “A very inquisitive person who somehow has got an idea that we have many
      interesting things to tell him about Trirodov,” said Elisaveta with a
      smile.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov raised his hat and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve had the honour to see you on the float.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, what of it?” asked Piotr sharply.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well—er, I have the honour to remind you,” said Ostrov with
      exaggerated politeness.
    </p>
<p>
      “What are you doing here?” asked Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve had the pleasure of meeting these charming young ladies,” Ostrov
      began to explain.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr interrupted him sharply:
    </p>
<p>
      “And now you let the young ladies alone and go away from here.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why shouldn’t I have turned to these young ladies with a polite question
      and an interesting tale?” asked Ostrov.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr, without replying, turned to the sisters:
    </p>
<p>
      “You little girls are ready to enter into conversation with every
      vagrant.”
     </p>
<p>
      An expression of bitterness crept into Ostrov’s face. Possibly this was
      only a game, but it was certainly well played. It made Piotr feel
      uncomfortable.
    </p>
<p>
      “A vagrant? And what is a vagrant?” asked Ostrov.
    </p>
<p>
      “What is a vagrant?” repeated Piotr in confusion. “What a question!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, sir, you have permitted yourself to use the word, and I’m rather
      interested to know in what sense you’ve used it in its application to me.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr, annoyed at being disconcerted by the stranger’s question, said
      sharply:
    </p>
<p>
      “A vagrant is one who roams about without shelter and without money and
      obtrudes upon others instead of attending to his own business.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Thank you for the definition,” said Ostrov with a bow. “It is true that I
      have but little money and that I’m compelled to roam about—such is
      the nature of my profession.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What is your profession?” asked Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov bowed with dignity and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’m an actor!”
     </p>
<p>
      “I doubt it,” said Piotr once more sharply, “you look more like a
      detective.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You are mistaken,” said Ostrov in a flustered way.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr turned away from him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Let us go home at once,” he said to the sisters.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0010" name="link2HCH0010"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER X
    </h2>
<p>
      It was growing dark. Ostrov was approaching Trirodov’s gates. His face
      betrayed agitation. It was even more clear now than by daylight that life
      had used him hardly. He felt painfully timid in going to Trirodov, in whom
      he evidently had certain hopes. Before Ostrov could make up his mind to
      ring the bell at the gates he walked the entire length of the stone wall
      that surrounded Trirodov’s house and garden and examined it attentively,
      without learning anything. Only the entire length of the tall wall was
      before his eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      It was already quite dark when Ostrov stopped at last at the main gate.
      The half-effaced figures and old heraldic emblems held his attention for a
      moment only. He had already taken hold of the brass bell-handle and paused
      cautiously, as if it were his habit to reconsider at the last moment; he
      gave a sudden shiver. A clear, childish voice behind his back uttered
      quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Not here.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov looked on both sides timidly, half stealthily, bending his head low
      and letting it sink between his shoulders. Quite close by a pale,
      blue-eyed boy dressed in white was standing and eyeing him with intent
      scrutiny.
    </p>
<p>
      “They won’t hear you here. Every one has left,” he said.
    </p>
<p>
      “Where is one to ring?” Ostrov asked harshly.
    </p>
<p>
      The boy pointed his finger to the left; it was a slow, graceful gesture.
    </p>
<p>
      “Ring at the small gate there.”
     </p>
<p>
      He ran off so quickly and quietly it seemed as if he had not been there.
      Ostrov went in the direction indicated. He came to a high, narrow gate. A
      white electric bell-button shone in a round wooden recess. Ostrov rang and
      listened. He could hear somewhere the rapid shivering tones of a tiny
      bell. Ostrov waited. The door did not open. Ostrov rang once more. It was
      quiet behind the door.
    </p>
<p>
      “I wonder how long there’s to wait?” he grumbled, then gave a shout: “Hey,
      you in there!”
     </p>
<p>
      A faint, muffled sound vibrated in the damp air, as if some one had
      tittered lightly. Ostrov caught hold of the brass handle of the gate. The
      gate opened towards him easily and without a sound. Ostrov looked round
      cautiously as he entered, and purposely left the gate open.
    </p>
<p>
      He found himself in a small court on either side of which was a low wall.
      The gate swung to behind him with a metallic click. Had he himself pulled
      it to rather quickly? He could not recall now. He walked forward about ten
      paces, when he came upon a wall twice as high as the side walls. It had a
      massive oak door; an electric bell-button shone very white on one side.
      Ostrov rang once more. The bell-button was very cold, almost icy, to the
      touch. A sensation of chill passed down his whole body.
    </p>
<p>
      A round window, like a dim, motionless, observing eye, was visible high
      above the door.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov could not say whether he waited there a long or a short time. He
      experienced a strange feeling of having become congealed and of having
      lost all sense of time. Whole days seemed to pass before him like a single
      minute. Rays of bright light fell on his face and disappeared. Ostrov
      thought that some one flashed this light on his face by means of a lantern
      from the window over the door—a light so intense that his eyes felt
      uncomfortable. He turned his face aside in vexation. He did not wish to be
      recognized before he entered. That was why he came in the dark of the
      evening.
    </p>
<p>
      But evidently he had been recognized. This door swung open as soundlessly
      as the first. He entered a short, dark corridor in the thick wall; then
      another court. No one was there. The door closed noiselessly behind him.
    </p>
<p>
      “How many courts are there in this devilish hole?” growled Ostrov.
    </p>
<p>
      A narrow path paved with stone stretched before him. It was lit up by a
      lamp from a distance, the reflection of which was directed straight
      towards Ostrov, so that he could see only the smooth grey slabs of stone
      under his feet. It was altogether dark on either side of the path, and it
      was impossible to know whether a wall was there or trees. There was
      nothing for him to do but to walk straight on. Nevertheless he
      occasionally thrust his foot out to either side of him and felt there; he
      was convinced that thickly planted, prickly bushes grew there. He thought
      there was another hedge beyond that.
    </p>
<p>
      “Tricks!” he grumbled.
    </p>
<p>
      As he slowly moved forward he experienced a vague and growing fear. So as
      not to be caught off his guard, he put his left hand into the pocket of
      his dusty and greasy trousers and felt there the hard body of a revolver,
      which he then transferred to his right-hand pocket.
    </p>
<p>
      On the threshold of the house he was met by Trirodov. Trirodov’s face
      expressed nothing except an apparent effort to suppress his feelings.
      There was no warmth or welcome in his voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “I did not expect to see you.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’ve come, all the same,” said Ostrov. “Whether you like it or not,
      you’ve got to receive your dear guest.”
     </p>
<p>
      There was contemptuous defiance in his voice. His eyes looked more
      insolent than ever. Trirodov frowned lightly and looked straight into
      Ostrov’s eyes, which were compelled to turn aside.
    </p>
<p>
      “Come in,” said Trirodov. “Why didn’t you write and tell me that you
      wished to see me?”
     </p>
<p>
      “How should I know that you were here?” growled Ostrov surlily.
    </p>
<p>
      “Nevertheless, you found out,” said Trirodov, with a vexed smile.
    </p>
<p>
      “Found out quite by accident on the float,” replied Ostrov. “Heard you
      mentioned in conversation. I don’t think you’ll care to know what they
      said.”
     </p>
<p>
      He gave an insinuating smile. Trirodov merely said: “Come in. Follow me.”
     </p>
<p>
      They ascended a narrow, very steep staircase with low, wide stairs; there
      were frequent turnings in various directions round all sorts of odd
      corners, interrupted by long landings between the climbs; each landing
      revealed a tightly shut door. The light was clear and unwavering. A cold
      gaiety and malice, a half-hidden, motionless irony, were in the gleam of
      the incandescent wires bent inside the glass pears.
    </p>
<p>
      Some one walked behind with a light, cautious step. There were the
      clicking sounds of lights being extinguished; the passages they had just
      passed through were plunged in darkness.
    </p>
<p>
      At last they reached the top of the stairway. They walked through a long
      corridor and found themselves in a large gloomy room. There was a
      sideboard against one of the walls and a table in the middle; cut-glass
      dishes rested along shelves around the room. It was to all appearances a
      dining-room.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s quite the proper thing to do,” grumbled Ostrov. “A meal would do me
      no harm.”
     </p>
<p>
      The light was strangely distributed. Half of the room and half of the
      table were in the shadow. Two boys dressed in white waited at the table.
      Ostrov winked at them insolently.
    </p>
<p>
      But they looked on calmly and departed quite simply. Trirodov settled
      himself in the dark part of the room. Ostrov sat down at the table.
      Trirodov began:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, what do you want of me?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Now that’s a businesslike question,” answered Ostrov, with a hoarse
      laugh, “very much a business question, not so much a gracious as a
      businesslike question. What do I want? In the first place, I am delighted
      to see you. There is a certain bond between us—our childhood and all
      the rest of it.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’m very glad,” said Trirodov dryly.
    </p>
<p>
      “I doubt it,” responded Ostrov impudently. “Then again, my dear chap, I’ve
      come for something else. In fact, you’ve guessed what I’ve come for.
      You’ve been a psychologist ever since I can remember.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What is it you want?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Can’t you guess?” said Ostrov, winking his eye.
    </p>
<p>
      “No,” replied Trirodov dryly.
    </p>
<p>
      “In that case there’s nothing left for me to do but to tell you straight:
      I need money.”
     </p>
<p>
      He laughed hoarsely, unnaturally; then, pouring out a glass of wine,
      mumbled as he gulped it down:
    </p>
<p>
      “Good wine.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Every one needs money,” answered Trirodov coldly. “Where do you intend to
      get it?”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov turned in his chair. He chuckled nervously and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve come to you, as you see. You evidently have lots of money, and I
      have little. Comment is needless, as the newspapers would say.”
     </p>
<p>
      “So that’s it! And suppose I refuse?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov whistled sharply and looked insolently at Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, old chap,” he said rudely, “I don’t count on your permitting
      yourself such a stupid mistake.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why not?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why not?” repeated Ostrov after him. “I think the facts must be as clear
      to you as to me, if not more so—and there’s nothing to be gained by
      the world getting wind of them.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I owe you nothing,” said Trirodov quietly. “I don’t understand why I
      should give you money. You’d only spend it recklessly—squander it
      most likely.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And do you spend it any more sensibly?” asked Ostrov with a malicious
      smile.
    </p>
<p>
      “If not more sensibly, at least with more reckoning,” retorted Trirodov.
      “In any case, I’m prepared to help you. Only I may as well tell you that I
      have little spare cash and that even if I had it I’d not give you much.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov gave a short, abrupt laugh and said with decision:
    </p>
<p>
      “A little is of no use to me. I need a lot of money. But perhaps you’ll
      not think it much.”
     </p>
<p>
      “How much do you want?” asked Trirodov abruptly.
    </p>
<p>
      “Twenty thousand roubles,” replied Ostrov, making a determined effort to
      brazen it out.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ll not give you so much,” said Trirodov, “and I couldn’t even if I
      wished to.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov drew nearer to Trirodov and whispered:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ll inform against you.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What then?” asked Trirodov, untouched by the threat.
    </p>
<p>
      “It will be bad for you. It’s a capital crime, as you know, my dear chap,
      and of a no mean order,” said Ostrov in a menacing tone.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yours, my good fellow,” said Trirodov in his usual calm voice.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ll manage to wriggle out of it somehow, but will see that you get your
      due,” said Ostrov with a laugh.
    </p>
<p>
      “You’re making a sad mistake if you think that I have anything to fear,”
       observed Trirodov, with a shrug of his shoulders.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov seemed to grow more insolent every minute. He whistled and said
      banteringly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Tell me now, if you please! Didn’t you kill him?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I? No, I didn’t kill him,” answered Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Who then?” asked Ostrov in his derisive voice.
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s alive,” said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Fiddlesticks!” exclaimed Ostrov.
    </p>
<p>
      And he burst out into a loud, insolent, hoarse laugh, though he seemed
      panic-stricken at the same time. He asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “What of those little prisms which you’ve manufactured? I’ve heard that
      even now they are lying on the table in your study.”
     </p>
<p>
      “That’s true,” said Trirodov dryly.
    </p>
<p>
      “And I’m told that your present is not absolutely clean either,” observed
      Ostrov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes?” asked—Trirodov derisively.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes-s,” continued Ostrov jeeringly. “The first business in your colony is
      conspiracy, the second corruption, the third cruelty.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov gave a stern frown and asked scornfully:
    </p>
<p>
      “You’ve had enough time to gather a bouquet of slanders.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes-s, I’ve managed, as you see. Whether they are slanders is quite
      another matter. I can only say that they fit you somehow. Take, for
      instance, those perverse habits of yours; need I recall them to you? I
      could remind you, if I wished, of certain facts from your early life.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You know you are talking nonsense,” said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “It is reported,” went on Ostrov, “that all this is being repeated in the
      quiet of your asylum.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Even if it were all true,” said Trirodov, “I do not see that you have
      anything to gain by it.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov’s eyes had a tranquil look. He seemed remote. His voice had a
      calm, hollow sound. Ostrov exclaimed vehemently:
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t imagine for a moment that I have fallen into a trap. If I don’t
      leave this place, I have prepared something that will send you to gaol.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Nonsense,” said Trirodov as quietly as before. “I’m not afraid. In the
      last resort I can emigrate.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I suppose you’ll put on the mantle of a political exile,” laughed Ostrov.
      “It’s useless! Our police, they’ll keep a sharp look-out for you, clever
      fellows that they are. Never fear, they’ll get you. They’ll get you
      anywhere. You may be sure of that.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They’ll not give me up where I’m going,” said Trirodov. “It’s a safe
      place, and you’ll not be able to reach me there.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What sort of place have you prepared for yourself?” asked Ostrov, smiling
      malignantly. “Or is it a secret?”
     </p>
<p>
      “It is the moon,” was Trirodov’s simple and tranquil answer.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov laughed boisterously. Trirodov added:
    </p>
<p>
      “Moreover, the moon has been created by me. She is before my window, ready
      to take me.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov jumped up in great rage from his place, stamped violently with his
      feet, and shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “You are laughing at me! It is useless. You can’t fool me with those
      stupid fairy-tales of yours. Tell those sweet little stories to the silly
      little girls of the provinces. I’m an old sparrow. You can’t feed me on
      chaff.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov remained unruffled.
    </p>
<p>
      “You’re fuming all for nothing. I’ll help you with money on a condition.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What sort of condition?” asked Ostrov with restrained anger.
    </p>
<p>
      “You’ll have to go from here—very far—for always,” answered
      Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ll have to think that over,” said Ostrov.
    </p>
<p>
      “I give you a week. Come to me exactly within a week, and you’ll receive
      the money.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov suddenly felt an incomprehensible fear. He experienced the feeling
      of having passed into another’s power. He felt oppressed. A stern smile
      marked Trirodov’s face. He said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “You are of such little value that I could kill you without scruple—like
      a snake. But I am tired even of other people’s murders.”
     </p>
<p>
      “My value?” Ostrov muttered hoarsely and absurdly.
    </p>
<p>
      “What is your value?” went on Trirodov. “You are a hired murderer, a spy,
      a traitor.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov said in a meek voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Nevertheless, I’ve not betrayed you so far.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Because it wouldn’t pay, that’s why you’ve not betrayed me. Again, you
      dare not.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What do you want me to do?” asked Ostrov humbly. “What is your condition?
      Where do you want me to go?”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0011" name="link2HCH0011"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XI
    </h2>
<p>
      Trirodov left a pleasant impression on Rameyev. Rameyev made haste to
      return his visit: he went together with Piotr. Piotr did not wish to go to
      Trirodov’s, but could not make up his mind to refuse. He kept frowning on
      the way, but once in Trirodov’s house he tried to be courteous. This he
      did constrainedly.
    </p>
<p>
      Misha soon made friends with Kirsha and with some of the boys. An intimacy
      sprang up between the Rameyevs and Trirodov—that is, to the extent
      that Trirodov’s unsociableness and love of a solitary life permitted him
      to become intimate.
    </p>
<p>
      It once happened that Trirodov took Kirsha with him to the Rameyevs and
      remained to dinner. Several other close acquaintances of the Rameyevs came
      to dinner. The older of the visitors were the Cadets, the younger were the
      Es-Deks<a href="#linknote-11" id="linknoteref-11" name="linknoteref-11"><small>11</small></a>
      and the Es-Ers.<a href="#linknote-12" id="linknoteref-12" name="linknoteref-12"><small>12</small></a>
</p>
<p>
      At the beginning there was a long agitated discussion in connexion with
      the news brought by one of the younger guests, a public school instructor
      named Voronok, an Es-Er. The Chief of Police had been killed that day near
      his house. The culprits managed to escape.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov took almost no part in the conversation. Elisaveta looked at him
      with anxious eyes, and the yellow of her dress appeared like the colour of
      sadness. It had been remarked by all that Trirodov was thoughtful and
      gloomy; he seemed to be tormented by some secret agitation, which he made
      obvious efforts to control. At last the attention of all was turned upon
      him. This happened after he had answered one of the girls’ questions.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov noticed that they were looking at him. He felt uneasy and vexed
      with himself. This vexation, however, helped him to control his agitation.
      He became more animated, threw off, as it were, some weight, and began to
      talk. The glance of Elisaveta’s deep blue eyes grew joyous at this.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr put in a remark just then, in his usual parochial, self-confident
      manner:
    </p>
<p>
      “If it were not for the wild changes in Peter’s time, everything would
      have gone differently.”
     </p>
<p>
      There was a tinge of derision in Trirodov’s smile.
    </p>
<p>
      “A mistake, wasn’t it?” he observed. “But if you are going to look for
      mistakes in Russian history, why not start earlier?”
     </p>
<p>
      “You mean at the beginning of creation?” said Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      “Precisely then. But without going so far back, let us pause at the
      Mongolian period,” replied Trirodov. “The historical error was that Russia
      did not amalgamate with the Tartars.”
     </p>
<p>
      “As if there were not enough Tartars in Russia now!” said Piotr, provoked.
    </p>
<p>
      “That’s precisely why there are many—because they didn’t
      amalgamate,” observed Trirodov. “They should have had the sense to
      establish a Russo-Mongolian empire.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And become Mohammedans?” asked Dr. Svetilovitch, a very agreeable person
      but very confident of all that was obvious.
    </p>
<p>
      “Not at all!” answered Trirodov. “Wasn’t Boris Godunov a Christian? That’s
      not the point at issue. All the same, we and the Catholics of Western
      Europe have regarded each other as heretics; and our empire might have
      become a universal one. Even if they had counted us among the yellow race,
      it should be remembered that the yellow race might have been considered
      under the circumstances quite noble and the yellow skin a very elegant
      thing.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You are developing a strange Mongolian paradox,” said Piotr
      contemptuously.
    </p>
<p>
      “Even now,” retorted Trirodov, “we are looked upon by the rest of Europe
      as almost Mongols, as a race mixed with Mongolian elements. You know the
      saying: ‘Scratch a Russian and you will find a Tartar.’”
     </p>
<p>
      A discussion arose which continued until they left the table.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr Matov was very much out of sorts during the entire dinner. He found
      almost nothing to say to his neighbour, a young girl, a dark-eyed,
      dark-haired beauty, an Es-Dek. And the handsome Es-Dek began to turn more
      and more towards the diner on the other side of her, the priest Zakrasin.
      He belonged to the Cadets, but was nearer to her in his convictions than
      the Octobrist<a href="#linknote-13" id="linknoteref-13" name="linknoteref-13"><small>13</small></a> Matov.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr was displeased because Elisaveta paid no attention to him and
      appeared to be absorbed in Trirodov and in what he was saying; and it
      vexed him because Elena also now and then let her softened gaze rest upon
      Trirodov. He felt he wanted to say provoking things to Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yet he is a guest,” reflected Piotr to himself, but at last he could hold
      out no longer; he felt that he must in one way or another shake Trirodov’s
      self-assurance. Piotr walked up to him and, swaying before him on his long
      thin legs, remarked, without almost the slightest effort to conceal his
      animosity:
    </p>
<p>
      “Some days ago on the pier a stranger made inquiries about you. Kerbakh
      and Zherbenev were talking nonsense, and he sat down near them and seemed
      very interested in you.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Rather flattering,” said Trirodov unwillingly.
    </p>
<p>
      “I cannot say to what an extent it is flattering,” said Piotr maliciously.
      “In my opinion there was little to recommend him. His appearance was
      rather suspicious—that of a ragamuffin, in fact. Though he insists
      he’s an actor, I have my doubts. He says you are old friends. A most
      insolent fellow.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov smiled. Elisaveta remarked with some agitation:
    </p>
<p>
      “We met him some days ago not far from your house.”
     </p>
<p>
      “It’s quite a lonely place,” observed Trirodov in an uncertain voice.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr went on to describe him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, that’s the actor Ostrov,” assented Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta, feeling a strange unrest, put in:
    </p>
<p>
      “He seemed to have gone around the neighbourhood looking about and asking
      questions. I wonder what he can be up to.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Evidently a spy,” said the young Es-Dek contemptuously.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov, without expressing the slightest astonishment, remarked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Do you think so? It’s possible. I really don’t know. I haven’t seen him
      for five years now.”
     </p>
<p>
      The young Es-Dek, thinking that Trirodov felt offended at her reference to
      his acquaintance, added affectedly:
    </p>
<p>
      “You know him well; then please pardon me.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I don’t know his present condition,” put in Trirodov. “Everything is
      possible.”
     </p>
<p>
      “It’s impossible to be responsible for all chance acquaintances!”
       interpolated Rameyev.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov turned to Piotr:
    </p>
<p>
      “And what did he say about me?”
     </p>
<p>
      But his voice did not express any especial curiosity. Piotr replied with a
      sarcastic smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “He said very little, but asked a great deal. He said that you knew him
      very well. In any case, I soon left.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, I have known him a long time,” was Trirodov’s calm answer. “Perhaps
      not too well, yet I know him. I had some dealings with him.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I think he paid you a visit yesterday?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said Trirodov in reply to Elisaveta’s question, “he came to see me
      last evening, quite late. I don’t know why he chose such a late hour. He
      asked assistance. His demands were large. I will give him what I can. He’s
      going away from here.”
     </p>
<p>
      All this was said in jerks, unwillingly. No one seemed to care to continue
      the subject further, but at this moment, quite unexpectedly to all, Kirsha
      entered into the conversation. He went up to his father and said in a
      quiet but audible voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “He purposely came late, while I slept, so that I shouldn’t see him. But I
      remember him. When I was very little he used to show me dreadful tricks. I
      don’t remember them now. I can only remember that I used to get frightened
      and that I cried.”
     </p>
<p>
      All looked in astonishment at Kirsha, exchanged glances and smiled.
    </p>
<p>
      “You must have, seen it in a dream, Kirsha,” said Trirodov—quietly.
      Then, turning to the older people: “Boys of his age love fantastic tales.
      Even we love Utopia and read Wells. The very life which we are now
      creating is a joining, as it were, of real existence with fantastic and
      Utopian elements. Take, for example, this affair of....”
     </p>
<p>
      In this manner Trirodov interrupted the conversation about Ostrov and
      changed it to another subject that was agitating all circles at the time.
      He left very soon after that. The others also stayed but a short time.
    </p>
<p>
      There was an atmosphere of irritation and hostility after the guests had
      gone. Rameyev reproached Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      “My dear Petya, you shouldn’t have done that. It isn’t hospitable. You
      were looking all the time at Trirodov as if you were getting ready to send
      him to all the devils.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr replied with a controlled gruffness:
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, precisely, to all the devils. You have guessed my feelings, uncle.”
     </p>
<p>
      Rameyev eyed him incredulously and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why, my dear fellow?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why?” repeated Piotr, giving free rein to his irritation. “What is he? A
      charlatan? A visionary? A magician? Is he in partnership with some unclean
      power? What do you think of it? Or is it the devil himself come in a human
      shape—a little grey, cloven-hoofed demon?”
     </p>
<p>
      “That’s enough, Petya; what are you saying?” said Rameyev with annoyance.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta smiled an incredulous smile, full of gentle irony; a golden,
      saddened smile, set off by the melancholy yellow rose in her black hair.
      And Elena’s astonished eyes dilated widely.
    </p>
<p>
      “Think it over yourself, uncle,” went on Piotr, “and look around you. He
      has bewitched our little girls completely!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, if he has,” said Elena with a gay smile, “it’s only just a little
      as far as I am concerned.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta flushed but said with composure:
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, he’s interesting to listen to; and it’s no use stuffing one’s ears.”
     </p>
<p>
      “There, she admits it!” exclaimed Piotr angrily.
    </p>
<p>
      “Admits what?” asked Elisaveta in astonishment.
    </p>
<p>
      “That for the sake of this cold, vain egoist you are ready to forget every
      one.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’ve not noticed either his vanity or his egoism,” said Elisaveta coldly.
      “I wonder how you’ve managed to know him so well—or so ill.”
     </p>
<p>
      “All this is pitiful and absurd nonsense, only an excuse for starting a
      quarrel,” said Piotr angrily.
    </p>
<p>
      “Petya, you envy him,” retorted Elisaveta with unaccustomed sharpness.
      Then, feeling that she had overstepped the mark, she added:
    </p>
<p>
      “Do forgive me, Petya, but really you are exasperating sometimes with your
      personal attacks.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Envy him? Why should I?” he said hotly. “Tell me, what useful thing has
      he done? To be sure, he has published a few tales, a volume of verses—but
      name me even a single work of his prose or verse that contains the
      slightest sense or beauty.”
     </p>
<p>
      “His verses....” began Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      But Piotr would not let her continue.
    </p>
<p>
      “Tell me, where is his talent? What is he famous for? All that he writes
      only seems like poetry. If you look at it closely you will see that it is
      bookish, forced, dry—it is diabolically suggestive without being
      talented.”
     </p>
<p>
      Rameyev interrupted in a conciliatory tone:
    </p>
<p>
      “You’re unjust. You can’t deny him everything.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Let us admit, then, that there’s something in his work not altogether
      bad,” continued Piotr. “Who is there nowadays who cannot put together some
      nice-sounding versicles! Yet what is there really I should respect in him?
      He’s nothing but a corrupt, bald-headed, ridiculous, and dull-sighted
      person—yet Elisaveta considers him a handsome man!”
     </p>
<p>
      “I never said anything about his being handsome,” protested Elisaveta. “As
      for his corruption, isn’t it purely town tattle?”
     </p>
<p>
      She frowned and grew red. Her blue eyes flared up with small greenish
      flames. Piotr walked angrily out of the room.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why is he so annoyed?” asked Rameyev in astonishment.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta lowered her head and said with childish bashfulness:
    </p>
<p>
      “I don’t know.”
     </p>
<p>
      She could not repress an ashamed smile at her timid words, because she
      felt like a little girl who was concealing something. At last she overcame
      her shame and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s jealous!”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0012" name="link2HCH0012"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XII
    </h2>
<p>
      Trirodov loved to be alone. Solitude and silence were a holiday to him.
      How significant seemed his lonely experiences to him, how delicious his
      devotion to his visions. Some one came to him, something appeared before
      him, wonderful apparitions visited him, now in dream, now in his waking
      hours, and they consumed his sadness.
    </p>
<p>
      Sadness was Trirodov’s habitual state. Only while writing his poems and
      his prose did he find self-oblivion—an astonishing state, in which
      time is shrivelled up and consumed, in which great inspiration consoles
      her chosen ones with divine exultation for all burdens, for all annoyances
      in life.
    </p>
<p>
      He wrote much, published little. His fame was very limited—there
      were few who read his verses and prose, and even among these but a few who
      acknowledged his talent. His stories and lyrical poems were not
      distinguished by any especial obscurity or any especial decadent
      mannerisms. They bore the imprint of something strange and exquisite. It
      needed an especial kind of soul to appreciate this poetry which seemed so
      simple at the first glance, yet actually so out of the ordinary.
    </p>
<p>
      To others, from among those who knew him, the public’s ignorance of him
      appeared inexplicable. His capabilities seemed sufficiently great to
      awaken the attention and admiration of the crowd. But he, to some extent,
      detested people—perhaps because he was too confident of his own
      genius—and he never made a definite effort to gratify them. And that
      was why his works were only rarely published.
    </p>
<p>
      In general, Trirodov did not encourage intimacies with people. He found it
      painful to look with involuntary penetration into the confusion of their
      dark, foggy souls.
    </p>
<p>
      He found himself at ease only in the company of his wife. Love makes kin
      of souls. But his wife had died a few years ago, when Kirsha was six years
      old. Kirsha remembered her; he could not forget her, and kept on recalling
      her. Trirodov for some reason associated his wife’s death with the birth
      of his son, though there was no obvious connexion: his wife died from a
      casual, sharp illness. Trirodov thought:
    </p>
<p>
      “She bore, and therefore had to die. Life is only for the innocent.”
     </p>
<p>
      After her death he always awaited her; there was for him the consoling
      thought:
    </p>
<p>
      “She will come. She will not deceive me. She will give a sign. She will
      take me with her.”
     </p>
<p>
      And life became as easy to bear as a vacillant vision seen in dream.
    </p>
<p>
      He loved to look at his wife’s portrait. It was painted by a celebrated
      English artist and hung in his study. There were also many photographic
      reproductions of her. It was his joy to muse of her and, musing, to
      delight in images of her handsome face and her lovely body.
    </p>
<p>
      Sometimes his solitude was broken by the intrusion of external life and
      external, unemotional love. A woman used to come in to him sometimes—a
      strange, undemanding woman who seemed to come from nowhere and to lead to
      nowhere. Trirodov had had relations with her for several months. She was
      an instructress in the local girls’ school, Ekaterina Nikolayevna Alkina—a
      quiet, tranquil, cold creature with dark red hair and a thin face, the
      dull pallor of which emphasized the impressively vivid lips of her large
      mouth; it seemed as if all the sensuality and colour of the face had
      poured themselves into the lips and made them startlingly and painfully
      vivid and suggestive of sin. She had married and had parted from her
      husband. She had a son, who lived with her. She was an S.D.<a href="#linknote-14" id="linknoteref-14" name="linknoteref-14"><small>14</small></a>
      and worked in the organization, but all this was merely incidental in her
      life. She met Trirodov in party work. Her comrades understood as by some
      intuition that in order to carry on negotiations with Trirodov, who did
      not permit himself any intimacy with them, it was necessary to choose this
      woman.
    </p>
<p>
      And now Alkina had come again, and began as always:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve come on business.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov regarded her with a deep, tranquil glance and answered her with
      the usual commonplaces of welcome.
    </p>
<p>
      Slightly agitated by hidden desires, Alkina spoke of the “business” in
      hand.
    </p>
<p>
      It had already been decided that the party orator who was to come to speak
      at the projected mass meeting would be quartered at Trirodov’s: this was
      thought to be the least dangerous place. Alkina came to say that the
      orator was expected that evening. It was necessary to bring him to
      Trirodov’s house in such a way that the town should not know anything
      about it. As soon as they had decided at what entrance he should be
      received Trirodov went out of the room to make the necessary arrangements.
      The agreeable consciousness of creative mystery filled him with joy.
    </p>
<p>
      When Trirodov returned Alkina was standing at the table and turning over
      the pages of a new book. Her hands trembled slightly. She glanced
      expectantly at Trirodov. She appeared to wish to say something meaningful
      and tender—but instead she resumed her remarks on business. She told
      him what was new in town, in her school, in the organization—about
      the confiscation of the local newspaper, about personalities ordered to
      leave town by the police, about the factory ferment.
    </p>
<p>
      “Who will be our own speakers at the mass meeting?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Bodeyev, from the school, for one.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I do not like his manner of speaking,”, said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s a good party workman,” observed Alkina with a timid smile. “He’s to
      be valued for that.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You know, of course, that I am not much of a party man,” said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      Alkina was silent. She trembled lightly as she rose from her seat, then
      suddenly ceased to be agitated. Only her vivid lips, speaking slowly,
      seemed to be alive in her pale face.
    </p>
<p>
      “Giorgiy Sergeyevitch, will you love me a little?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov smiled. He sat quietly in his chair and looked at her simply and
      dispassionately. He did not answer at once. Alkina asked again with her
      sad and gentle humility:
    </p>
<p>
      “Perhaps you haven’t the time, nor the desire?”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, Katya, I shall be glad,” answered Trirodov calmly. “You’ll find it
      convenient in there,” and he signified with his eyes the little
      neighbouring room which had no other exit.
    </p>
<p>
      Alkina flushed lightly and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “If you will permit me, I’d rather undress here. It would give me joy to
      have you look at me a long time.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov helped her to undo the clasps of her skirt. Alkina sat down on a
      chair, bent over, and began to undo the buttons of her boots. Then, with
      evident enjoyment at having freed her feet, she walked slowly across the
      floor towards the door and turned the key in the lock.
    </p>
<p>
      “As you know, I have but one joy,” she said.
    </p>
<p>
      She gracefully threw off her clothes and stood before Trirodov with
      uplifted arms. She was sinuously slender, like a white serpent. Crossing
      the fingers of her upraised hands, she bent her whole body forward, so
      that she appeared more sinuously slender than ever, and the curve of her
      body almost resembled a white ring. Then she relaxed her arms, stood up
      erect, all tranquil and self-possessed, and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I want you to take a good look at me. I haven’t grown old yet, have I?
      And not altogether faded?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov surveyed her with admiration and said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Katya, you are as handsome as always.”
     </p>
<p>
      Alkina was mistrustful.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s true, isn’t it, that clothes have too long cramped my body and
      injured the skin. How can my body be handsome?”
     </p>
<p>
      “You are graceful and flexible,” answered Trirodov. “The lines of your
      body are somewhat elongated but wholly elastic. If any one were to measure
      your body he would find no error in its proportions.”
     </p>
<p>
      Alkina scrutinized herself attentively and went on incredulously:
    </p>
<p>
      “The lines are good—but the colour? I believe you once said that
      Russians often have unpleasant complexions. When I look on the whiteness
      of my body I am reminded of plaster of paris, and I begin to weep because
      I am so ugly.”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, Katya,” asserted Trirodov. “The whiteness of your body is not like
      plaster of paris. It is marble, slightly rose-tinged. It is milk poured
      into a pink crystal vase. It is mountain snow lit up with the last glow of
      sunset. It is a white reverie suffused with rose desire.”
     </p>
<p>
      Alkina smiled joyously and flushed lightly as she asked him:
    </p>
<p>
      “Will you take a few snapshots of me to-day? Otherwise I shall weep,
      because I am so ugly and so meagre that you do not wish to recall
      sometimes my face and my body.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” answered Trirodov, “I have a few films ready.”
     </p>
<p>
      Alkina laughed gleefully and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Now kiss me.”
     </p>
<p>
      She bent over Trirodov and almost fell into his arms. The kisses seemed
      tranquil and innocent; it might have been a sister kissing a brother. How
      gentle and elastic her skin was under his hands! Alkina pressed against
      him with a submissive, yielding movement. Trirodov carried her to the
      wide, soft couch. She lay in his arms timidly and quietly and looked
      straight into his eyes with a simple, innocent look.
    </p>
<p>
      When the sweet and deep minutes passed, followed by fatigue and shame,
      Alkina lay there motionlessly with half-closed eyes—and then said
      suddenly:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve been wanting to ask you, and somehow couldn’t decide to. Do you
      detest me? Perhaps you think me very shameless?”
     </p>
<p>
      She turned her face towards him and looked at him with frightened, ashamed
      eyes. And he answered her with his usual resolution:
    </p>
<p>
      “No, Katya. Shame is often needed, in order that we may gain control over
      it.”
     </p>
<p>
      Alkina once more lay back calmly, basking naked under his glances, as
      under the rays of the high Dragon. Trirodov was silent. Alkina laughed
      quietly and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “My husband used to be so respectable, mean and polite. He never beat me—he
      was not a cultured man for nothing—and he never even used coarse
      words. If he had but called me a fool! I sometimes think that I wouldn’t
      have left him if our quarrels hadn’t passed so quietly, if he had but beat
      me, pulled me by my hair, lashed me with something.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Sweet?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Life is so dull,” continued Alkina. “One struggles in the nets of petty
      annoyances. If one could but cry out, but give wail to one’s yearning,
      one’s woe, one’s unendurable pain!”
     </p>
<p>
      She said this with a passion unusual to her and grew silent.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0013" name="link2HCH0013"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XIII
    </h2>
<p>
      It was drawing towards evening, and once more Trirodov was alone,
      tormented by his unceasing sadness. His mind was in a whirl. He was in a
      half-somnolent state, which was like the foreboding of a nightmare. His
      half-dreams and half-illusions were full of the day’s impressions, full of
      burning, cruel reveries.
    </p>
<p>
      It had just grown dark. A fire was visible on a height near the town. The
      town boys were making merry. They had lit a bonfire, and were throwing the
      brands into the air; as they rose swiftly, the burning brands appeared
      like skyrockets against the blue sky. And these beautiful flights of fire
      in the darkness gave joy and sadness.
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha, silent as always, came to his father. He placed himself at the
      window and looked out with his dark, sad eyes upon the distant fires of
      St. John’s Eve. Trirodov went up to him. Kirsha turned quietly towards his
      father:
    </p>
<p>
      “This will be a terrible night.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov answered as quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “There will be nothing terrible. Don’t be afraid, Kirsha. You had better
      go to sleep, my boy, it is time.”
     </p>
<p>
      As if he had not heard his father, Kirsha went on:
    </p>
<p>
      “The dead will soon rise from their graves.”
     </p>
<p>
      “The dead are already rising from their graves,” replied Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      A strange feeling of astonishment stirred within him, why did he speak of
      this? Or was it due to the urgency of the questioner’s desire? Quietly,
      ever so quietly, half questioning, half relating, Kirsha persisted:
    </p>
<p>
      “The dead will walk on the Navii<a href="#linknote-15" id="linknoteref-15" name="linknoteref-15"><small>15</small></a> footpath,
      the dead will speak Navii words.”
     </p>
<p>
      And again, as though submitting to a strange will, not his own, Trirodov
      replied:
    </p>
<p>
      “The dead have already risen, they are already walking upon the Navii
      footpath, towards the Navii town, they are already speaking Navii words
      about Navii affairs.”
     </p>
<p>
      And Kirsha asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Are you going?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I am going,” said Trirodov after a brief silence.
    </p>
<p>
      “I am going with you,” said Kirsha resolutely.
    </p>
<p>
      “You had better not go, dear Kirsha,” said his father tenderly.
    </p>
<p>
      But Kirsha persistently repeated:
    </p>
<p>
      “I will spend this night with you there, at the Navii footpath. I will see
      and I will hear. I will look into dead eyes.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov said sternly:
    </p>
<p>
      “I do not wish to take you with me—you ought to remain here.”
     </p>
<p>
      There was entreaty in Kirsha’s voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Perhaps mother will come by.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov, falling into deep thought, said finally:
    </p>
<p>
      “Very well, come with me.”
     </p>
<p>
      The evening dragged on slowly and sadly. The father and son waited. It
      grew quite dark by the time they went.
    </p>
<p>
      They walked through the garden, past the closed greenhouse with its
      mysteriously glittering window-panes. The quiet children were not yet
      asleep. Quietly they swung in the garden upon their swings. Quietly
      clinked the swing rings, quietly creaked the wooden seats. Upon the swings
      sat the quiet children, lit up by the dead moon and cooled by the night
      breeze, and they swung softly and sang their songs. The night listened to
      their quiet songs, and the full, clear, dead moon also. Kirsha, lowering
      his voice so that the quiet children might not hear, asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why don’t they sleep? They swing on their swings neither upward nor
      downward, but evenly. Why do they do this?”
     </p>
<p>
      “They must not sleep to-night,” answered Trirodov, also in a whisper.
      “They cannot sleep until the dawn grows rosy, until the dawn begins to
      laugh. There is really no reason why they should sleep. They can sleep as
      well by day.”
     </p>
<p>
      Again Kirsha asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Will they go with us? They want to go.”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, Kirsha, they don’t want anything.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Don’t want anything?” repeated Kirsha sadly.
    </p>
<p>
      “They ought not to go with us unless we call them.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Shall we call them?” asked Kirsha joyously.
    </p>
<p>
      “We shall call one. Which one would you like?”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha, after some thought, said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Grisha.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Very well, we’ll call Grisha,” said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      He turned in the direction of the swings, and called out:
    </p>
<p>
      “Grisha!”
     </p>
<p>
      A boy, who resembled the sad-faced Nadezhda, quietly jumped down from his
      swing, and walked behind them, without approaching too closely. The other
      quiet children looked tranquilly after him, and continued to swing and to
      sing as before.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov opened the gate, and was followed by Kirsha and Grisha. The night
      hovered all around them, and the forgotten Navii footpath stretched in a
      black strip through the darkness.
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha shivered—he felt the cold, heavy earth under his bare feet;
      the cold air pressed against his bare knees, the cold moist freshness of
      the night blew against his half-bared breast. He heard his father ask in a
      low voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Kirsha, are you not afraid?”
     </p>
<p>
      “No,” whispered Kirsha, as he breathed in the fresh aroma of the dew and
      the light mist.
    </p>
<p>
      The light of the moon was seductive with mystery. She smiled with her
      lifeless, tranquil face, and appeared to be saying:
    </p>
<p>
      “What was will be again. What was will happen more than once.”
     </p>
<p>
      The night was peaceful and clear. They walked a long time—Trirodov
      and Kirsha, and some distance behind them the quiet Grisha followed. At
      last there appeared, quite near, peering through the mist, the low white
      cemetery wall. Another road cut across theirs. Quite narrow, its worn
      cobblestones gleamed dimly in the moonlight. The road of the living and
      the road of the dead crossed each other at the entrance of the cemetery.
      In the field near the crossing several mounds were visible—they were
      the unmarked graves of suicides and convicts.
    </p>
<p>
      The whole neighbourhood, bewitched with mystery and fear, seemed
      oppressed. The flat field stretched far—all enveloped in a light
      mist. Far to the left, the town fires showed their vague glimmers through
      the mist—and marked off by the wall of mist, the town seemed to be
      very distant, and to be guarding jealously from the fields of night the
      tumultuous voices of life.
    </p>
<p>
      An old witch, grey, and all bent, appeared from somewhere; she swung a
      crutch and stumbled on in haste. She was mumbling angrily:
    </p>
<p>
      “It doesn’t smell of our spirit. Strangers have come! Why have they come?
      What can strangers want here? What are they seeking? They’ll find what
      they don’t want to find. Ours will see them, and will tear them to pieces,
      and will scatter the pieces before all the winds.”
     </p>
<p>
      Suddenly there was a weird rustle, there rose all about them the squeak of
      piping little voices, and the sounds of a confused scampering. At the
      crosspaths there darted in all directions, as thick as dust, countless
      hordes of grey sprites and evil spirits. Their running was so impetuous
      that they could have borne along with them every living, weak-willed soul.
      And it could already be seen that running in their midst were the pitiful
      souls of little people. Kirsha whispered in a voice full of fear:
    </p>
<p>
      “Quicker, quicker into the ring! They will bear us away if we don’t mark
      ourselves in.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov called quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Come here, come here, quiet boy, draw a circle around us with your
      nocturnal little stick.”
     </p>
<p>
      They no sooner had succeeded in marking themselves in with the magic line
      than the dead began to pass down the Navii path. The throng of the dead,
      submitting to some evil malediction, walked towards the town. The spectres
      walked in the nocturnal silence and the traces they left behind them were
      light, curious, and hardly distinguishable. Whispered conversations were
      heard—lifeless words. The dead walked at random, without any denned
      order. At the beginning the voices merged into a general drone, and only
      afterwards, by straining one’s ears, it was possible to distinguish
      separate words and whole phrases.
    </p>
<p>
      “Be good yourself, that’s the chief thing.”
     </p>
<p>
      “For mercy’s sake—what perversion, what immorality!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Plenty of food and plenty of clothes—what more can one want?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I haven’t sinned much.”
     </p>
<p>
      “That’s what they deserve. Kisses are not for them.”
     </p>
<p>
      In the beginning all the dead fused into one dark, grey mass. But
      gradually, if one looked intently one could distinguish the separate
      corpses.
    </p>
<p>
      One nobleman who passed by had a cap with a red band on his head; he was
      saying with calm and deliberation:
    </p>
<p>
      “The divine right of ownership should be inviolable. We and our ancestors
      have built up the Russian land.”
     </p>
<p>
      Another of the same class, who walked beside him, remarked:
    </p>
<p>
      “My motto—autocracy, orthodoxy, and nationality. My credo—a
      strong redeeming power.”
     </p>
<p>
      A priest in a black vestment swung a censer, and cried in a tenor voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Every soul should submit to sovereign dominion. The hand that gives will
      not grow poorer.”
     </p>
<p>
      A wise muzhik passed by muttering:
    </p>
<p>
      “We know everything, but are not saying anything just yet. When you don’t
      know anything they leave you alone. Only you can’t cover up your mouth
      with a handkerchief.”
     </p>
<p>
      Several soldiers walked past together. They bawled their indecorous songs.
      Their faces were grey-red in colour. They stank of sweat, putrescence, bad
      tobacco, and vodka.
    </p>
<p>
      “I have laid down my stomach for my faith, my Tsar, and my Fatherland,” a
      smart young colonel was saying.
    </p>
<p>
      After him came a thin man with the face of a Jesuit and cried out loudly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Russia for the Russians!”
     </p>
<p>
      A stout merchant kept on repeating:
    </p>
<p>
      “If you don’t cheat you can’t sell your goods. Even a fur coat might be
      turned inside out. Your penny makes you well thought of anywhere.”
     </p>
<p>
      An austere, freckled woman was saying:
    </p>
<p>
      “Beat me, seeing that I’m your woman, but there’s no law that’ll let you
      tie up with a girl so long as you’ve got a wife living.”
     </p>
<p>
      A muzhik walked at her side, a dirty, ill-smelling fellow, who said
      nothing and hiccuped.
    </p>
<p>
      Once more there was a nobleman, large, stout, bristling, savage-looking.
      He ranted:
    </p>
<p>
      “Hang them! Flog them!”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov turned to Kirsha:
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t be afraid, Kirsha—these are dead words.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha silently nodded his head.
    </p>
<p>
      A mistress and her servant-maid walked together and exchanged quarrelsome
      words.
    </p>
<p>
      “God didn’t make all the trees in the forest alike. I am a white bone, you
      are a black bone. I am a gentlewoman, you are a peasant-woman.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You may be a gentlewoman, yet trash.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Maybe trash, but still from the gentry.”
     </p>
<p>
      Quite close to the magic line there was an apparent effort on the part of
      an elegantly dressed woman and a young man of the breed of dandies to
      emerge from the general throng. They had been only recently buried, and
      they exhaled the odour of fresh corpses. The woman coquettishly moved her
      half-putrefied lips and complained in a hoarse, creaking voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “They’ve forced us to walk with all these <i>Khams</i>.<a href="#linknote-16" id="linknoteref-16" name="linknoteref-16"><small>16</small></a>
      They might have let us walk separately from all this common folk.”
     </p>
<p>
      The dandy suddenly complained in a squeaking voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Be careful, there, muzhik, don’t nudge. What a dirty fellow!”
     </p>
<p>
      The muzhik had evidently only just jumped out of his grave; he was barely
      awake, and he had not yet realized himself or understood his condition. He
      was all dishevelled and in rags. His eyes were turbid. Curses and indecent
      words issued from his dead lips. He was angry because he had been
      disturbed, and he bawled:
    </p>
<p>
      “By what right? You are lying there and not doing any one any harm, and
      are roused and made to walk along. What new rules have they got for us—disturbing
      the dead! You’ve only just found your earth—when up you must be and
      moving.”
     </p>
<p>
      Unsteady on his feet, the muzhik continued to pour out his coarse abuse;
      when he saw Trirodov he opened his eyes wide and went straight to him. He
      was blindly conscious of being in the presence of a stranger and an enemy
      and he wished to destroy him. Kirsha trembled and grew pale. He clung to
      his father in fear. The quiet boy, retaining his tranquil sadness, stood
      at their side, like an angel on guard.
    </p>
<p>
      The muzhik touched the enchanted line. Pain and terror transpierced him.
      He stared with his dead eyes, but quickly lowered them; as he was unable
      to withstand the look of the living, he fell with his forehead to the
      ground just beyond the line and begged for mercy.
    </p>
<p>
      “Go!” said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      The muzhik rose to his feet and scampered away. But he soon paused, and
      again burst out into abuse; then ran farther.
    </p>
<p>
      Two lean, poorly dressed boys, with green faces, walked by. The rags which
      bound their feet hung loosely. One of them said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Do you understand? They tormented me, tyrannized over me. I ran away and
      they caught me again—I had no strength left. I went to the garret
      and strangled myself. I don’t know what I shall get for it now.”
     </p>
<p>
      The other green boy replied:
    </p>
<p>
      “As for me, I was beaten with salted rods. My hands are quite clean.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, you are lucky,” said the first boy enviously. “You will get a little
      golden wreath, but what will happen to me?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I will entreat the angels, the archangels, the cherubim and the seraphim
      for you—give me but your full name and address.”
     </p>
<p>
      “My sin is quite a big one, and my name is Mitka Sosipatrov, from Nizhniya
      Kolotilovka.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Don’t be afraid,” said the birched boy. “As soon as they let me in to the
      upper chambers, I will at once fall at the feet of the Virgin Mary until
      you are forgiven.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, do me this great favour.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha stood pale. His eyes sparkled. He trembled from head to foot and
      kept on repeating:
    </p>
<p>
      “Mamma, come to me! Mamma, come to me!”
     </p>
<p>
      A radiant apparition suddenly appeared in the throng, and Kirsha throbbed
      with joy. Kirsha’s mother passed by—all white, all lovely, all
      gentle. She turned her tranquil eyes upon her dear ones and whispered:
    </p>
<p>
      “I will come.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha, transported with a quiet joy, stood motionless. His eyes gleamed
      like the eyes of the quiet angel who stood there on guard.
    </p>
<p>
      Again the dead throng moved on. A governor passed by. All his figure
      breathed might and majesty. Yet hardly awake, he grumbled:
    </p>
<p>
      “Make way for the Russian Governor! I’ll have no patience with you. I will
      not permit it! You cannot frighten me. What! Feed the hungry, you say?”
     </p>
<p>
      He appeared, as it were, to awaken at these words; he looked around him
      and said in great astonishment, as he shrugged his shoulders:
    </p>
<p>
      “What a strange disorder! How did I get into this crowd? Where is the
      police?”
     </p>
<p>
      Then he suddenly bawled out:
    </p>
<p>
      “Let the Cossacks come!”
     </p>
<p>
      In response to the Governor’s cry a detachment of Cossacks came flying.
      Without noticing Trirodov and the children, they swept along past them and
      savagely flourished their <i>nagaikas</i>.<a href="#linknote-17" id="linknoteref-17" name="linknoteref-17"><small>17</small></a> The dead,
      pressed from behind by the Cossacks’ horses, became a confused, wavering
      mass, and answered with malignant laughter to the blows of the <i>nagaikas</i>
      upon their lifeless bodies.
    </p>
<p>
      The grey witch sat down on a near-by stone and shook with her hideous,
      creaking laughter.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0014" name="link2HCH0014"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XIV
    </h2>
<p>
      Elisaveta dressed herself up as a boy. She loved to do this and she did it
      quite often; so tedious is the monotony of our lives that even a change of
      dress furnishes a diversion!
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta put on a white sailor-jacket with a blue collar, and blue
      knee-breeches which revealed the beauty and grace of her sunburnt lower
      limbs; she put on a cap, took a fishing-rod and went to the river.
      Elisaveta looked like a rather tall stripling of fourteen in this dress.
    </p>
<p>
      It was quiet and bright on the river’s bank. Elisaveta sat down on a stone
      at the edge, lowered her feet into the water, and watched the float. A
      rowing-boat appeared. Elisaveta looked intently and saw that it contained
      Stchemilov. The latter called out:
    </p>
<p>
      “I say, my lad, if you belong here, can you tell me if....”
     </p>
<p>
      Then he paused because Elisaveta was laughing.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, who would have thought it—comrade Elisaveta?”
     </p>
<p>
      “You didn’t recognize me, comrade?” asked Elisaveta with a merry laugh, as
      she approached the landing-place where Stchemilov was already fastening
      his boat.
    </p>
<p>
      “I must confess that I didn’t know you at once,” he replied, as he pressed
      her hand warmly. “I have come for you. To-night we are to hold our mass
      meeting.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Is it really to-night?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      She grew cold from agitation and confusion as she recalled that she had
      promised to speak that evening.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, to-night,” said Stchemilov; “I hope you haven’t changed your mind.
      You will speak, eh?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I thought it was to be to-morrow,” she replied. “Just wait a moment. I’ll
      get a small bundle of clothes. I will change at your place.”
     </p>
<p>
      She quickly and gaily tripped up the bank. Stchemilov whistled as he sat
      waiting in the boat. Elisaveta soon reappeared, and deftly jumped into the
      boat.
    </p>
<p>
      It was necessary to row past the whole length of the town. No one on
      either bank recognized Elisaveta in her boy’s attire. Stchemilov’s house,
      a cabin in the middle of a vegetable garden, stood on a steep bank of the
      river, just along the edge of the town.
    </p>
<p>
      No one had yet arrived at the house. Elisaveta picked up a periodical
      which lay on the table and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Tell me, comrade, how do you like these verses?”
     </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov looked at the periodical, open at a page which contained
      Trirodov’s verses. He smiled and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “What shall I say? His revolutionary poems are not bad. Nowadays, however,
      everybody writes them. As for his other works, they are not written about
      us. Noblemen’s delights are not for us.”
     </p>
<p>
      “It’s a long time since I’ve been here,” said Elisaveta. “What a mess
      you’ve got here.”
     </p>
<p>
      “A house without a mistress,” answered Stchemilov, rather confused.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta began to put things in order and to clean and to scrub. She
      moved about with agile grace. Stchemilov admired her graceful limbs; it
      was fascinating to watch the play of the muscles under the brown skin of
      her calves. He exclaimed in a clear, almost ecstatic voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “How graceful you are, Elisaveta! Like a statue! I never saw such arms and
      legs.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I feel embarrassed, comrade Aleksei. You praise me to my eyes as if I
      were a charming piece of property.”
     </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov suddenly flushed with embarrassment; his habitual
      self-assurance appeared to have left him unexpectedly. He breathed heavily
      and stammered out in confusion:
    </p>
<p>
      “Comrade Elisaveta, you are a fine person. Don’t be offended at my words.
      I love you. I know that for you social inequality is a silly thing; and
      you know that for me your money is of no account. Now if I am not
      repugnant to you....”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta stood before him calm and yet sad, and as she dried her hands,
      grown red from the cold water, with a towel, she said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Forgive me, comrade Aleksei—you are right about my views, but I
      love another.”
     </p>
<p>
      She herself did not know how these words came to be spoken. Love another!
      So unexpectedly the secret of her heart revealed itself in superficial
      words. But did he love her, that other one?
    </p>
<p>
      They were both flustered. Stchemilov strove heroically to control his
      agitation. As he looked with his confused eyes into her clear blue ones he
      said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Forgive me, Elisaveta, and forget what I have said. I didn’t guess right
      that time and did the wrong thing. I didn’t think that you’d love him.
      Don’t be angry at me and don’t despise me.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Enough, Aleksei,” said Elisaveta tenderly. “You know how I respect you.
      We are friends. Give me your hand.”
     </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov gave her hand a tight, comradely pressure, then bent down and
      kissed it. Elisaveta drew nearer to him and kissed his lips with a
      tranquil, innocent, delicious kiss, such as a sister gives a brother. Then
      she snatched up her bundle and ran into the passage, one of the doors of
      which led to a small storeroom where the literature was kept in a trunk
      under the floor.
    </p>
<p>
      She ran into Kiril on the way.
    </p>
<p>
      “Is Aleksei home, my lad?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said Elisaveta; “enter, comrade Kiril.”
     </p>
<p>
      When Kiril heard the familiar voice and, lifting his eyes, saw plaits of
      hair wound around the lad’s head, he was astonished. He was very much
      embarrassed upon recognizing Elisaveta. She hid herself behind the door of
      the storeroom, while Kiril blundered for a long time in the dark hall,
      unable in his confusion to find the door.
    </p>
<p>
      Others began to come in: there was the school-instructor Bodeyev,
      instructor Voronok of the town school, and the imported orator, who came
      accompanied by Alkina.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta was attired by now in a simple dark blue dress.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s time to start,” said Stchemilov.
    </p>
<p>
      Once seated in the rowing-boat, the members of the party became silent and
      slightly nervous. Only the new-comer was perfectly calm—he was used
      to it. Near-sighted, he looked indifferently out of his spectacles, now
      one side, now the other, and told bits of news while smoking one cigarette
      after another. He was young, tall, and flat-chested. He had a lean face,
      long, smooth, chestnut-coloured hair, and a scant beard. His flat round
      cap, reddish in the sun, gave him the look of an artisan.
    </p>
<p>
      It had begun to grow dark by the time they disembarked at the appointed
      place. There was still a half-verst to go through the wood on foot. The
      evening twilight seemed oppressed under the eternal vaults of the wood; it
      hummed and rustled with barely audible noises and the sad whisperings of
      stealthy beings.
    </p>
<p>
      They gathered at last in a large glade in the midst of a tall, dense wood.
      The moon was already high in the sky, and the black shadows of the trees
      crept across half of the glade. The trees were intensely still and
      pensive, as if they wished to listen to the words of these people who had
      collected at their feet. But they really did not care to listen—they
      had their own life and were indifferent to all these people. And they
      suffered neither joy nor sadness at sheltering in their dark shade many
      young girls who were in love with the dream of liberation—among them
      Elisaveta, who was also in love with this dream, and who created for it a
      temple of young passion and embroidered into this dream’s design the image
      of a living man in a mysterious house. She was deliciously in love and
      painfully agitated by the sudden acknowledgment she made of her love in
      her poignantly sweet words, “I love another.”
     </p>
<p>
      In the dark shade of the trees were red glimmering cigarettes and pipes.
      The odour of tobacco mingled with the fresh, nocturnal coolness and gave
      it a sweet piquancy. Piquant also, in the nocturnal stillness, were the
      sounds of the young, eager voices. And these people had no concern with
      the mystery of the wood made audible in the silence. The people behaved as
      if they were at home. They sat about and walked and met each other and
      chatted. Sometimes, when the din of talk grew too loud, the leaders of the
      meeting uttered their warnings. Then the voices were lowered.
    </p>
<p>
      There were about three hundred people of all kinds—labouring men,
      young people from schools, young Jews, and very many girls. All the young
      Jews and Jewesses of the town had come. They were agitated more than the
      rest and their speech nearly always passed into a violent commotion. They
      awaited so much, they hoped so passionately! They were so painfully in
      love with the dream of liberation!
    </p>
<p>
      Some of the instructresses from Trirodov’s colony were also here, among
      them the sad Nadezhda and the ecstatic Maria. There were quite a number of
      schoolboys and schoolgirls present. These tried to act at ease, to show
      that it was not their first occasion of the sort. There were also many
      college students, both men and women. The young were burning with joyous
      unrest. But all who had gathered were intensely agitated. It was the sweet
      agitation of their dream of liberation; how tenderly and how passionately
      they were in love with it! And in more than one young heart virginal
      passion flowed together with the dream of liberation; young passionate
      love flamed with a great fire in the joy of liberation, making one of
      liberation and love, of revolt and sacrifice, of wine and blood—what
      delicious mystery in love thirsting and yielding! And more than one pair
      of eyes sparkled at the sight of a beloved image, and more than one pair
      of lips whispered:
    </p>
<p>
      “And he’s here!”
     </p>
<p>
      “And she’s here!”
     </p>
<p>
      In the shade, under the trees, where indiscreet glances could not
      penetrate, impatient lips met in a quick, timid kiss. And the first words
      were:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’m not late, comrade?”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, comrade Natalya, you are in time.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Let us go over there, comrade Valentine.”
     </p>
<p>
      The names were pronounced tenderly. A man in a cap, black shirt,<a href="#linknote-18" id="linknoteref-18" name="linknoteref-18"><small>18</small></a>
      and high boots, walked up to Elisaveta. He had a small black beard and
      moustache, and his face, which was both familiar and unfamiliar, had
      something in it that stirred her. He exclaimed:
    </p>
<p>
      “Elisaveta, you don’t recognize me?”
     </p>
<p>
      She recognized him at once by his voice. A warmth suffused her. She
      laughed and said joyously:
    </p>
<p>
      “I knew you by your voice alone. Your beard and moustache make you wholly
      unrecognizable.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They are glued on,” explained Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      They conversed. He heard some one whisper behind his back:
    </p>
<p>
      “That is comrade Elisaveta. She’s considered the first beauty in our
      town.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov was for some reason overjoyed at these words, partly because
      Elisaveta heard them and blushed so furiously that even the dim moonlight
      could not hide her blushes.
    </p>
<p>
      A few detectives had also managed to find their way here, and there was
      even one provocateur. These chattels alone knew that the police had
      information about the meeting and that the wood would shortly be encircled
      by the Cossacks.
    </p>
<p>
      Conversations were kept up among small groups for some time before the
      meeting opened. The agitators discussed matters with labouring men who
      were not in the party. The more interesting people were introduced to the
      invited speaker.
    </p>
<p>
      Stchemilov’s loud voice rang out:
    </p>
<p>
      “Comrades, attention. I propose comrade Abram as chairman.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Agreed, agreed,” came suppressed voices from every side.
    </p>
<p>
      Comrade Abram took his place on a high stump of a hewn-down tree. The
      speeches began. Elisaveta was nervous until it came her turn to speak. She
      was troubled with pain and fear because she knew that Trirodov would hear
      her.
    </p>
<p>
      Proud, brave watchwords and bold instructions were heard. The provocateur
      also made a speech. He urged them to an immediate armed revolt. Some one’s
      voice called out:
    </p>
<p>
      “Comrades—this man’s a provocateur!”
     </p>
<p>
      There was a commotion. The provocateur shouted something in his defence.
      He was promptly jostled out.
    </p>
<p>
      Then Stchemilov spoke; he was followed by the invited orator. Elisaveta’s
      agitation grew.
    </p>
<p>
      But when the chairman said, “Comrade Elisaveta, the word belongs to you,”
       she suddenly became calm and, having ascended the high stump that served
      as the platform, began to speak. Her deep, measured voice carried far.
      Some one seemed to echo it in the wood—it was like a fantastic,
      restless din. A being beloved by her and near to her sat there and
      listened; her beloved, near comrades also listened. Hundreds of attentive
      eyes followed her, and the dear friendly looks, converging like lances
      under a shield, held her very high in the pure atmosphere of happiness.
    </p>
<p>
      The sweet moments of joy passed by like a short dream. She ended her
      speech and came down among the audience, where she was received with
      flattering comments and strong pressures of the hand—sometimes, it
      must be confessed, a little over-strong.
    </p>
<p>
      “I say, comrade, you’ll break my hand. How strong you are!”
     </p>
<p>
      And his face would also break into a joyous smile.
    </p>
<p>
      The speeches ended. The songs began. The wood re-echoed with proud, brave
      words, with a song of freedom and revolt. Suddenly the song stopped short,
      a confused murmur ran through the crowd. Some one shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “The Cossacks!”
     </p>
<p>
      Some one shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “Run, comrades!”
     </p>
<p>
      Some one ran. Some one shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “Be calm, comrades!”
     </p>
<p>
      The Cossacks had hid themselves in the wood a couple of versts from the
      meeting. Many of them had managed to take several drinks. As they sat
      around their bonfires they began to sing a gay, noisy, indecent song, but
      their officers enjoined silence.
    </p>
<p>
      A spy came running; he whispered something to the colonel. Soon a command
      was given. The Cossacks jumped quickly on their horses and rode away,
      leaving the half-consumed bonfire behind them. The dry faggots and the
      grass smouldered a long time. The forest caught fire.<a href="#linknote-19" id="linknoteref-19" name="linknoteref-19"><small>19</small></a>
</p>
<p>
      “What’s the matter?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      Some one whispered quickly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Do you hear, it’s the Cossacks! I wonder which side they are coming from.
      It’s hard to tell which way to run.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They are coming from town,” said some one. “The only thing to do is to go
      towards Opalikha.”
     </p>
<p>
      The leaders began to give orders:
    </p>
<p>
      “Comrades, be calm. Scatter as quickly as possible. Don’t jostle. The road
      to Dubky is clear.”
     </p>
<p>
      A number of horses’ heads suddenly appeared from among the trees quiet
      close to Elisaveta, and their dumb but good eyes looked on
      incomprehensibly. The crowd of young people began to run, and carried
      Elisaveta along with them. She was seized by a feeling of stupor. She
      thought:
    </p>
<p>
      “What’s the use of running? They’ll overtake us and drive us wherever they
      will.”
     </p>
<p>
      But she had not enough strength to pause. They were all running, and she
      with them. Another detachment of Cossacks appeared in front of them. Cries
      and wails went up from the crowd, which began to scatter in all
      directions. The Cossacks came on, as it were, in a broad chain.
    </p>
<p>
      Many managed to break through, some with blood-stained faces and torn
      clothes. The others were driven forward from the rear and the sides and
      gradually became a compact mass. It was evident that the Cossacks were
      trying to get the crowd into the middle of the glade. Those who had broken
      through the ring at the very beginning had some hope of escape. There were
      about a hundred people in the ring. They were driven towards the town, and
      those who tried to escape were lashed with the <i>nagaika</i>.
    </p>
<p>
      A few shots resounded in the distance. The provocateur fired the first
      shot—into the air. This aroused the anger of the Cossacks, who began
      to shoot at those who ran.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta and Alkina managed to escape the first ring together. But they
      could hear all around them the cries of the Cossacks. They paused and
      pressed close to an old oak, not knowing which way to turn. They were
      joined by Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Follow me,” he said to them; “I think I can find a less dangerous place.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What has become of our invited speaker?” asked Alkina.
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t worry about that,” was the impatient reply; “he was the first to be
      attended to. He’s out of danger now. You’d better go on quickly.”
     </p>
<p>
      He walked confidently through the bushes and they followed him.
    </p>
<p>
      The sounds made by the patrols of Cossacks were heard on every side.
      Suddenly the runners were confronted by the figure of a Cossack who
      stepped out from the bushes. He aimed his <i>nagaika</i> at Elisaveta, but
      she, falling headlong, escaped the brunt of the blow. The Cossack bent
      down, caught Elisaveta by her plait of hair, and began to drag her after
      him. Elisaveta cried out from pain. Trirodov pulled out a revolver and
      shot him almost without taking aim. The Cossack cried out and let his
      victim go. All three then made their way through the bushes. A deep hollow
      cut their progress short.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, we are almost out of danger here,” said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      They lowered themselves, almost rolled down to the bottom of the hollow.
      Their faces and hands bore scratches and their clothes were torn. On one
      of the sloping sides of the hollow they found a deep recess made by the
      rains, and now obscured by the bushes; and here they hid themselves.
    </p>
<p>
      “Presently we’ll make for the river-bank,” said Trirodov. “We are quite
      close to it.”
     </p>
<p>
      Suddenly they heard the crackle of breaking twigs above them, followed by
      a revolver-shot and outcries. A running figure defined itself in the dark.
    </p>
<p>
      “Kiril!” called Elisaveta in a whisper, “come here.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kiril heard her, and threw himself through the bushes in the direction of
      the hiding-place. Elisaveta could now see, quite close to her, his
      fatigued, desperate eyes. There was a loud, near report of a revolver.
      Kiril reeled; there was the sound of breaking twigs as he fell heavily and
      rolled down the hollow.
    </p>
<p>
      Presently a running Cossack came down precipitately from above. He brushed
      so closely past them that a twig caught by his body struck Alkina’s
      shoulder. But Alkina did not stir; pale, slender, and calm, she stood
      tightly pressing her body against the almost perpendicular wall of their
      refuge. The Cossack bent over Kiril, examined him attentively, then
      muttered as he straightened himself:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, there’s no breath left in him. You’re done for, my clever chap.”
     </p>
<p>
      Then he turned to climb back again. When the rustle of the parted bushes
      ceased Trirodov said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Now we must walk carefully along this hollow until we come to the river.
      There is a bend in the river here in the direction of the town—we
      are bound to get somewhere almost across from my place. Then we must find
      our way to the other side somehow or other.”
     </p>
<p>
      Slowly and cautiously they made their way through the thick growths of the
      hollow. They walked in the dark—Trirodov and the two with him, his
      chance one and his fated one, sent him by the two Moirae, Aisa and Ananke.<a href="#linknote-20" id="linknoteref-20" name="linknoteref-20"><small>20</small></a>
</p>
<p>
      The bushes became moist and a fresh breeze blew from the river. Then
      Alkina came close to Trirodov and whispered to him:
    </p>
<p>
      “If you are glad that she loves you, tell me, and I will share your
      gladness.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov pressed her hand warmly.
    </p>
<p>
      The quiet, dim river lay before them. Beyond it the labours and dangers of
      life created by the dream of liberation awaited them.
    </p>
<p>
      Soon the mist would rise above the river under the cold and witching moon—soon
      the misty veil of fantasy would lighten the tedious and commonplace life,
      and behind the veil of mist there would rise in dim outlines another kind
      of life, creative and unattainable.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0015" name="link2HCH0015"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XV
    </h2>
<p>
      That night the streets of Skorodozh were alive with noises—which
      gradually died away. The frightened townsmen sprang from their warm beds,
      and peering through the half-opened blinds into the dark streets saw those
      who had been caught in the woods led away in the custody of the Cossacks.
      Then when the stamp of horses’ hoofs and the hum of human voices subsided,
      the residents quietly went back to their beds, and were soon asleep. Lady
      Godiva would have been highly pleased with such modest people: they
      looked, yet did not show themselves, and did not hinder.
    </p>
<p>
      They went to bed again, and muttered something to their wives. The
      freedom-loving bourgeois grumbled:
    </p>
<p>
      “They won’t let you sleep. The horses’ hoofs make such a noise. They might
      employ bicycles instead of horses.”
     </p>
<p>
      The night passed like a nightmare for many. It seemed to grip all life
      with a cold apprehensiveness, and burdened one’s soul with a hate towards
      the earthly life which suffered agony from its bondage to the flaming,
      exultant Dragon. Why did he exult? Was it because we beings of the earth
      are evil and cruel, and love to torment, to see drops of blood and tears?
    </p>
<p>
      Our dark, earthly nature is suffused with a cruel voluptuousness. Such is
      the imperfection of the human breed that a single human vessel contains
      all the deepest ecstasies of love and all the lowest delights of lust, and
      the mixture is poisoned with shame and with pain—and with the desire
      for shame and pain. From one fountain come both the gladdening raptures
      and the gladdening lusts of the passions. We torment others only because
      it gives us joy.
    </p>
<p>
      After the agonies on the way from the wood, after a search had been made,
      many of the prisoners were dispatched to prison. Others were set free.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
      A restless, sluggish, and unfriendly morning rose over the city. From the
      wood, just beyond the town, came the half-pleasant, half-disagreeable
      odour of a forest fire.
    </p>
<p>
      The news about the two dead victims, Kiril and another workman, Kliukin, a
      family man, soon spread. Their comrades were excited.
    </p>
<p>
      The corpses had been taken to the mortuary of the town hospital. A large
      crowd, grave, silent, and resolute in mood, had gathered quite early near
      the mortuary. It mostly consisted of labouring men, and their wives and
      children. The large square in front of the hospital, with its dirty,
      unpaved spots, its trampled grass, its grey, gloomy little shops, appeared
      oppressed by an atmosphere of early morning fatigue. The slant rays of the
      rising Dragon, veiled with a light mist, fell upon the scowling faces of
      the crowd as indifferently as upon the fence or the closed gates. The
      Ancient Dragon is not our sun.
    </p>
<p>
      The faces of those who stood near the closed gates were scowling. No one
      was permitted to enter the hospital. Within, preparations were going on
      for a secret burial of the victims. Tumultuous voices of anger rose in the
      crowd.
    </p>
<p>
      A detachment of Cossacks soon appeared on the scene. They came on quickly,
      and paused near the crowd. The beautiful smooth horses trembled
      sensitively. The riders were handsome, sun-burnt, black-eyed, and
      black-browed; their black hair, not cut in the military fashion, was
      visible from under their high hats. The women in the crowd looked at them
      now and then with involuntary admiration.
    </p>
<p>
      The tumult increased, the crowd continued to grow. The whole square was
      alive with people. There seemed to be imminent danger of a bloody
      collision.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov went that morning to the chief of the rural police and to the
      officer of the gendarmerie. He wished to convince them that a secret
      burial would only add to the workers’ excitement. The chief listened to
      him in a dull way, and kept on repeating:
    </p>
<p>
      “Impossible. I can’t....”
     </p>
<p>
      He gazed down persistently. This caused his neck to look tight, poured out
      like copper. And he kept on turning his ring round his finger as if it
      were a talisman protecting him from hostile calumny.
    </p>
<p>
      The colonel of the gendarmes proved easier to deal with. In the end
      Trirodov succeeded in obtaining an order for the surrender of the bodies
      of the dead men to their families.
    </p>
<p>
      The chief of the rural police arrived in the square. The crowd greeted him
      with discordant and angry cries. He stood up in his trap and motioned with
      his hand. Every one grew silent. He addressed them:
    </p>
<p>
      “Would you like to bury them yourselves? Very well, you shall have them.
      Only be careful that nothing happens which shouldn’t happen. In any case,
      the Cossacks will be present, in an emergency. And now I will see that the
      bodies of your comrades are delivered to you.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0016" name="link2HCH0016"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XVI
    </h2>
<p>
      The sun was already high when Elisaveta awoke. She quickly recalled all
      that happened the night before. She took but little time in dressing and,
      urged by a suppressed excitement, was soon on the way to Trirodov in her
      carriage. Trirodov met her at the gates. He was returning from town, and
      he told her briefly about his conferences with the authorities. Elisaveta
      said resolutely:
    </p>
<p>
      “I want to see the family of the dead man.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I don’t know where they live. We shall have to see Voronok first. He has
      all the information.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Shall we find him at home now?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I think so,” said Trirodov. “If he’s at home we’ll all start together.”
     </p>
<p>
      They drove off. The dusty road trailed behind the rapid wheels, and
      revealed vistas of depressing commonplaceness. The light dust, stirred by
      the wheels into the sultry air, trailed behind the carriage like a long
      serpent. The high flaming Dragon looked down from his inaccessible sky
      with furious eyes upon the impoverished earth. There was a thirst for
      blood in the hot glister of his rays, and there was a soaring exultation
      because men had shed some priceless drops of the wine of life. In the
      midst of these open, heat-swept spaces, Trirodov, drawn at this moment
      into the crowded town life, was addressing his companion in dull, everyday
      words:
    </p>
<p>
      “They searched many houses early this morning. They found a great deal of
      literature at Stchemilov’s. He’s been arrested.”
     </p>
<p>
      He also repeated the rumour of whippings at the police-station. Elisaveta
      was silent.
    </p>
<p>
      Voronok’s house was situated in a very convenient place, somewhere between
      the centre of the town and the factory section. This house had many
      visitors because Voronok was an assiduous worker in the local Social
      Democratic Party. His chief function was to carry on propaganda among the
      working men and the young, and incidentally to instil into them party
      views and a true understanding of the aims of the working classes.
    </p>
<p>
      Young boys used to come to Voronok, his pupils from the town school, and
      these brought their comrades and acquaintances with them—those whom
      they met at home or by chance. They were for the most part charming,
      sincere, and intelligent youngsters, but very dishevelled and very
      self-conscious. Voronok taught them very heartily and with good results.
      They assimilated his teachings: a sympathy towards the working
      proletariat, a hate towards the satiated bourgeois, a consciousness of the
      irreconcilability of the interests of the two classes, and a few random
      facts from history. The ragamuffins from the town school invariably opened
      every visit to Voronok by complaining against the school rules and the
      inspector. They complained chiefly about trifles. They would say with an
      injured air:
    </p>
<p>
      “They compel us to wear official badges upon our caps.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They treat us as if we were little children.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They brand us, so that every one may know that we are the boys of the
      town school.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They force us to cut our hair; why should our hair worry them?”
     </p>
<p>
      Voronok sympathized with them fully. This helped him to keep them in a
      state of revolt. Their no less unkempt friends, who did not go to school,
      also found something to complain about—if not against their parents,
      then against the police, indeed against anything that occurred to them.
      But their complaints did not contain quite that poison and steadiness
      which was instilled into the schoolboys with all the force of a school.
      Voronok used to give both classes pamphlets that cost a kopeck and were
      intensely strict in their party purity.
    </p>
<p>
      The younger of the working men also used to come to Voronok’s house. There
      were still others, a ragged, grumbling lot, who appeared to carry an air
      of eternal injury with them, as if they had lost all capacity for smiling
      and jesting. Voronok took great pains to read the pamphlets with them, and
      to explain to them anything that was not especially clear. Regular hours
      were allotted for these readings and conversations. By such means Voronok
      succeeded in developing the desired mood in his visitors; all the party
      shibboleths were assimilated by them quickly and thoroughly. He also gave
      them books for home reading. Many used to buy this literature
      occasionally.
    </p>
<p>
      In this manner, a flood of books and pamphlets continually poured through
      Voronok’s house. Sometimes he selected whole libraries, and sent them by
      trustworthy people through the villages.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta and Trirodov found Voronok at home. He did not much resemble a
      party workman; he was gracious, spoke little, and produced the impression
      of a reserved, well-trained man. He always wore starched linen, a high
      collar, a fashionable tie and a bowler hat. He had his hair trimmed short,
      and his beard was most neatly brushed.
    </p>
<p>
      “I will go with you, with pleasure,” said Voronok amiably.
    </p>
<p>
      He seized his thin cane, put on his bowler hat, took a cursory glance of
      himself in the mirror, and said again:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’m ready. But perhaps you’d like to rest?”
     </p>
<p>
      They declined, and the three of them started off. The painful silence of
      the bright streets hovered about them stealthily and expectantly. They
      seemed strangers among these wooden huts, depressing fences, and the
      tottering little bridges. They wanted to ask:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why are we going?”
     </p>
<p>
      But this only seemed to bring them closer, and to make the quick beats of
      their hearts more friendly. The whole picture of the life of the poor was
      here in all its sordidness; dirty, malicious children played here, and
      abused each other, and wrangled; a drunkard reeled; grey buckets swung on
      a grey wooden yoke across the shoulders of a grey woman in a worn grey
      dress.
    </p>
<p>
      There was everyday commonplaceness in the poverty of the house, where lay
      the hastily prepared yellow corpse. A pale-faced woman stood at its head,
      and wailed quietly and ceaselessly. Three pale, sandy-haired children came
      in and looked at the visitors; their gaze was at once strange and stupid,
      neither joyous nor sad, but dulled for ever.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta went up to the woman. The blooming, rosy, graceful girl stood at
      the side of the pale, tear-eyed woman, and was quietly saying something to
      her; the latter was nodding her head and crooning unnecessary, belated
      words. Trirodov turned quietly to Voronok:
    </p>
<p>
      “Is any money needed?”
     </p>
<p>
      Voronok whispered back:
    </p>
<p>
      “No, his comrades will bury him. We’ll make a collection among ourselves.
      Afterwards the family will need some money.”
     </p>
<p>
      The day of the funeral arrived. The factories stopped work. There was a
      clear sky, and under it the turbulent crowd; the light currents of incense
      streamed in the air, and its sumptuous aroma mingled with the light odour
      of the smoke that came from the forest cinders. The schoolboys struck and
      went to the funeral. Some of the schoolgirls came also. The more timid
      ones remained in school.
    </p>
<p>
      The children from Trirodov’s colony decided to come. They brought two
      wreaths with them. The quiet children came also. They kept by themselves
      and were silent.
    </p>
<p>
      The entire town police were present at the funeral. Even police from
      outlying districts were here. As always, petty provocateurs lurked among
      the crowd.
    </p>
<p>
      The crowd moved calmly and solemnly. Above it the wreaths swung, the red
      flowers glimmered vividly, the red ribbons fluttered. The Cossacks rode
      alongside. There was austerity and suspicion in their looks—they
      were prepared to suppress any demonstration. The chanting of a prayer
      could be heard. Each time the subsided chant was renewed, the Cossacks
      listened with great intentness. No—it was only the prayer again.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta and Trirodov walked with the crowd behind the coffin. They spoke
      of that which enraptures those who seek rapture and frightens those who
      seek repose. Poignant were Elisaveta’s impressions as she stepped upon the
      sharp cobblestones of the dusty, littered pavement.
    </p>
<p>
      The road was long. The austere harmony was kept up for some time. At last
      the cemetery was reached. Some dejected moments were passed in waiting by
      the church. The last services were pronounced hurriedly.
    </p>
<p>
      The Cossacks moved about in bustling fashion, and as before formed a
      circle around the throng.
    </p>
<p>
      The coffin was carried out of the church. The wreaths swung once more
      above the crowd, which moved on chanting.
    </p>
<p>
      Suddenly the women’s lament grew louder—the women’s lament above the
      grave. The instructor Bodeyev then stood at the head of the coffin. He
      began in his shrilly-thin, but far-carrying voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Comrades, we have gathered to-day at the grave of our brother....”
     </p>
<p>
      The colonel of the gendarmes went up to him, and said sternly:
    </p>
<p>
      “It is forbidden. I must ask you to do without speeches or
      demonstrations.”
     </p>
<p>
      Bodeyev asked in astonishment:
    </p>
<p>
      “But why?”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, I must ask you not to. It is forbidden,” said the colonel dryly.
    </p>
<p>
      Bodeyev shrugged his shoulders and remarked as he moved away:
    </p>
<p>
      “I submit to brute strength.”
     </p>
<p>
      “To the law,” the officer in the blue uniform corrected him sharply.
    </p>
<p>
      The dead man’s comrades, crowding near the grave, followed one another
      with handfuls of soil, which they threw on the coffin. The damp, heavy
      soil struck the coffin with a hollow sound.
    </p>
<p>
      The grave was being filled up. Every one stood silently, and as silently
      left the spot.
    </p>
<p>
      Then suddenly a voice was heard.
    </p>
<p>
      And in an instant the whole crowd began to sing words of a proud,
      melancholy, revolutionary song. The Cossacks looked on morosely. The
      command was given. The Cossacks quickly mounted their horses. The singing
      stopped abruptly.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
      Once outside the cemetery gates, Elisaveta said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I am hungry!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Let’s go to my place,” suggested Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Thank you,” said Elisaveta. “But I’d rather go to some tavern.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov looked at her in astonishment, but made no objection. He
      understood her curiosity.
    </p>
<p>
      The tavern was crowded and noisy. Trirodov and Elisaveta sat down near the
      window, at a small table covered with a dirty, spotted cloth. They ordered
      cold meat and light beer.
    </p>
<p>
      At one of the tables, a young man in a red shirt sat drinking. He was in a
      boastful mood. Behind his ear stuck a cigarette. The fellow intruded upon
      his neighbours, and shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “Who’s drunk?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, who?” asked a young working man at the next table contemptuously.
    </p>
<p>
      “I am drunk!” exclaimed the drunkard in the red shirt. “And who am I, do
      you know, eh?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, who are you? What sort of a bird are you?” asked the young working
      man in the black calico blouse derisively.
    </p>
<p>
      “I am Borodulin!” said the drunkard, and there was an expression on his
      face as if he had pronounced a famous name.
    </p>
<p>
      His neighbours roared with laughter, and shouted coarse, derisive words.
      The fellow in the red shirt cried angrily:
    </p>
<p>
      “What do you think? Is Borodulin, in your opinion, a peasant?”
     </p>
<p>
      The working man in the black blouse began to get annoyed. His lean cheeks
      grew red. He sprang from his place, and shouted angrily:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, who are you? Answer.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’m a peasant on my passport. An army reserve man. But that’s not all, I
      assure you,” said Borodulin.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, who then are you?” repeated the young working man angrily, as he
      took a step towards him.
    </p>
<p>
      “And do you know what I am on my card? Can you guess?” asked Borodulin.
    </p>
<p>
      He blinked, and tried to look important. The comrades of the young working
      man tried to dissuade him from pursuing his inquiries, and whispered as
      they drew him away:
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t waste your time on him. He’s a nobody.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’m a detective, that’s what I am!” said Borodulin with his important
      air.
    </p>
<p>
      The working man in the black blouse spat contemptuously and walked back to
      his table. Borodulin went on:
    </p>
<p>
      “You think I’m out of my senses. No, old chap, you’re mistaken. I’m an
      experienced man. What do you think of me now? I’m a detective. I can
      arrest any one!”
     </p>
<p>
      The men at the neighbouring tables listened to him and exchanged glances.
      Borodulin went on boasting.
    </p>
<p>
      “Suppose I put the police on to you?” asked a merchant at one of the
      middle tables angrily. His small black eyes sparkled.
    </p>
<p>
      Borodulin burst out laughing, and shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “I have the police in the hollow of my hand. That’s where I have them.”
     </p>
<p>
      The customers grumbled. Threats were heard:
    </p>
<p>
      “You’d better go away while you’re still whole.”
     </p>
<p>
      He paid his bill and left. Suddenly the sound of a crowd gathering in the
      street was heard. From the window Elisaveta and Trirodov could see the
      fellow in the red shirt sauntering backwards and forwards in the street,
      only a few paces from the tavern, and annoying the passers-by. He could be
      heard shouting:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ll report you! I’ll arrest you! Hand over your ten kopecks.”
     </p>
<p>
      Many, afraid of him, acceded to his request. Borodulin clutched at every
      passer-by. He threw off the men’s caps, he pinched the women, while he
      pulled young boys by the ear. The women ran from him shrieking. The more
      timid men also ran. The bolder ones paused in menacing attitudes. These
      Borodulin did not dare to molest. Small boys ran behind him in a crowd,
      laughing and hooting. Borodulin grumbled.
    </p>
<p>
      “You’d better look out. Do you know who I am?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, who are you?” asked a young fellow whom he jostled. “You’re a
      pothouse plug.”
     </p>
<p>
      A crowd formed round them. Their faces were morose and unfriendly.
      Borodulin was afraid, but he showed a bold front and boasted. He shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “Two or three of you will be necessary!”
     </p>
<p>
      A sudden attack was made upon Borodulin. A young robust fellow sprang
      forward from the crowd with a shout, an enormous cobblestone in his hand.
    </p>
<p>
      “What’s this dog showing his teeth for?”
     </p>
<p>
      He hit Borodulin on the head with the stone. It was unfortunately too well
      aimed. Borodulin fell. Others attacked him as he lay there. The workman
      who hit him with the stone made his escape.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta and Trirodov were looking out of the window. Trirodov exclaimed:
    </p>
<p>
      “The Cossacks!”
     </p>
<p>
      The people in the street scattered in all directions. The mutilated corpse
      lay in a pool of blood on the pavement.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0017" name="link2HCH0017"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XVII
    </h2>
<p>
      Ostrov caused Trirodov a great deal of annoyance. More than once Trirodov
      returned to the earlier circumstances of their acquaintance and to their
      recent meeting at Skorodozh.
    </p>
<p>
      The week having elapsed, Ostrov paid Trirodov another visit. That whole
      week Ostrov could not get rid of his confusion and uneasiness. The details
      of his meeting with Trirodov became absurdly entangled in his memory. He
      kept on forgetting the day of the week it was. The week passed rather
      quickly for him. This was possibly due to his having made several
      interesting acquaintances. He had become quite a noticeable personage
      about town.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov made his visit late on Tuesday evening. He was received at once,
      and led into a chamber on the ground floor. Trirodov came in almost
      immediately. Not a little astonished, he asked unwillingly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, what can I do for you, Denis Alekseyevitch?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’ve come for the money,” said Ostrov gruffly. “To receive the promised
      relief at your bountiful hands.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I did not expect you until Wednesday,” replied Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why Wednesday when Tuesday is just as good?” said Ostrov with a savage
      smile. “Or do you find it so hard to part with your cash? Have you become
      a bourgeois, Giorgiy Sergeyevitch?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov suddenly appeared to recall something as, with a tinge of
      derision in his smile, he asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “I beg your pardon, Denis Alekseyevitch, I thought you were coming
      to-morrow, as was arranged. I haven’t the money ready for you.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov was annoyed. His broad face grew dark. He exclaimed, his eyes red
      with anger:
    </p>
<p>
      “You asked me to come in a week, and I’ve come in a week. You don’t expect
      me to come here forty times, do you? I have other business. You’ve
      promised me the money, and so hand it over. You must loosen your
      purse-strings whether you like it or not.”
     </p>
<p>
      He grew more savage with every word. In the end he struck the small round
      white table that stood on slender legs in front of him with his stout
      fist. Trirodov answered calmly:
    </p>
<p>
      “It is now Tuesday. That means the week is not up yet.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What do you mean it isn’t up?” said Ostrov. “I came to see you on
      Tuesday. Do you count eight days in a week, in the French fashion? You
      won’t come off so easily.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You came here on Wednesday,” replied Trirodov. “And this is why I haven’t
      the money ready for you.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov was unable to grasp the situation. He looked at Trirodov with some
      perplexity, and showed his irritation.
    </p>
<p>
      “What do you mean by saying that you haven’t it ready? Why should you get
      it ready? All you’ve got to do is to take it out of your safe, count it
      out, and give it to me—that’s the whole method of procedure. It
      isn’t as if it were a lot of money—it’s a mere trifle.”
     </p>
<p>
      “It may be a trifle for some people. It isn’t at all a trifle for me,”
       said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t pretend that you’re poor! Some one might think you were a forsaken
      orphan! What do you expect us to believe?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov rose from his seat, looked with stern intentness into Ostrov’s
      eyes, and said resolutely:
    </p>
<p>
      “In a word, I can’t give you the money to-day. Try to come here to-morrow
      about this time.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov rose involuntarily from his chair. He experienced a strange
      sensation, as if he were being lifted from his seat by his collar and
      forcibly led to the door. He fired his parting shot:
    </p>
<p>
      “Only don’t think that you can pull wool over my eyes to-morrow. I’m not
      the sort of a chap whom you can feed on promises.”
     </p>
<p>
      His small eyes gleamed malignantly. His broad jaws trembled savagely. His
      feet seemed to carry him to the door of themselves.
    </p>
<p>
      “No,” answered Trirodov, “I do not intend to fool you. You will get your
      money tomorrow.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
      Ostrov came at the same hour next evening. This time he was led into
      Trirodov’s study.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well,” asked Ostrov rather impudently, “do you mean to give me the money?
      Or will you play the same farce once more?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov pulled a bundle of bank-notes out of a drawer in his
      writing-table, and said as he gave them to Ostrov:
    </p>
<p>
      “Please count them. There should be two thousand.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov whistled and said gruffly:
    </p>
<p>
      “That’s too little. I asked for much more.”
     </p>
<p>
      “That’s all you’ll get,” said Trirodov resolutely. “It ought to last you
      quite a while.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Perhaps you will add a trifle,” said Ostrov with a stupid smile.
    </p>
<p>
      “I can’t,” said Trirodov coldly.
    </p>
<p>
      “I can’t leave town on this money,” said Ostrov in a threatening voice.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov frowned, and looked sternly at Ostrov. New thoughts began to take
      shape in his mind, and he said:
    </p>
<p>
      “You won’t find it to your advantage to remain, and everything you do here
      will be known to me.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Very well, I’ll go away,” said Ostrov with a stupid smile. He took the
      money, counted it carefully, and put it into his greasy pocket. He was
      about to take his leave, but Trirodov detained him.
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t go yet. We’ll have a talk.”
     </p>
<p>
      At the same instant a quiet boy in his white clothes appeared from some
      dark corner. He paused behind Trirodov’s chair, and looked at Ostrov. His
      wide dark eyes, looking out of his pale face, brought Ostrov into a state
      of painful dread. He lowered himself slowly into the chair near the
      writing-table. His head felt giddy. Then a strange mood of nonchalance and
      submission took possession of him. His face bore an expression of
      apathetic readiness to do everything that he might be commanded to do by
      some one stronger than himself—whose will had conquered his.
      Trirodov looked attentively at Ostrov and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, tell me what I want to know. I wish to hear from your own lips what
      you are doing here, and what you are up to. You couldn’t have done much in
      such a short time, but you surely have found out something. Speak!”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov sniggered rather stupidly, fidgeted as if he were sitting on
      springs, and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Very well, I’ll tell you something interesting and won’t charge you a
      penny for it.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov, without taking off his heavy, fixed gaze from Ostrov’s face,
      repeated:
    </p>
<p>
      “Speak!”
     </p>
<p>
      The quiet boy looked with his eyes full of intense questioning straight
      into Ostrov’s eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      “Do you know who killed the Chief of Police?” asked Ostrov.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov was silent. Ostrov’s whole body twitched as he kept up his absurd
      sniggering.
    </p>
<p>
      “He killed him and went away,” went on Ostrov. “He made his escape by
      taking advantage of the confusion and the darkness, as the newspapers
      would say. The police have not caught him to this day, and the authorities
      do not even know who he is.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And do you know?” asked Trirodov in a cold, deliberate voice.
    </p>
<p>
      “I know, but I won’t tell you,” replied Ostrov rather venomously.
    </p>
<p>
      “You shall tell me,” said Trirodov with conviction. Then he added in even
      a more loud, determined, and commanding voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Tell me, who killed the Chief of Police?”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov fell back into his chair. His red face became tinged with a sudden
      grey pallor. His eyes, now bloodshot, half closed like those of a
      prostrate doll with the eye mechanism in its stomach. There was
      witheredness, almost lifelessness, in Ostrov’s voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Poltinin.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Your friend?” asked Trirodov. “Well, go on.”
     </p>
<p>
      “He is now being sought for,” went on Ostrov in the same lifeless way.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why did Poltinin kill the Chief of Police?”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov resumed his stupid snigger, and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s a matter of very delicate politics. That means, it simply had to be
      done. I won’t tell you why. Indeed, I couldn’t tell you if I really wished
      to. I don’t know myself, I can only venture to guess. But what is a guess
      worth?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said Trirodov, “it is quite true that it is impossible for you to
      know this. Continue your tale.”
     </p>
<p>
      “This same affair,” said Ostrov, “is a very profitable article for us just
      now. Indeed, an article in the budget, as they say.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov’s face did not reveal any astonishment, as Ostrov went on:
    </p>
<p>
      “We have Potseluytchikov among us, a very lively individual.”
     </p>
<p>
      “A thief?” asked Trirodov abruptly.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov smiled almost consciously, and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Not exactly a thief, still one’s got to be careful with him. An able man
      in his way.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov’s eyes assumed a frankly insolent expression. Trirodov asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “What sort of relation has he to this article in your budget?”
     </p>
<p>
      “We send him out to the rich men of the place.”
     </p>
<p>
      “To blackmail them?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov replied with complete readiness:
    </p>
<p>
      “Precisely. Let us suppose that he comes to Mr. Moneybags. ‘I have,’ he
      tells him, ‘a thing to tell you in confidence, a thing of great personal
      interest to you.’ Left alone with Mr. Moneybags he says to him: ‘Five
      hundred roubles, if you please!’ The other, it goes without saying, is up
      on his hind legs. ‘What for? What sort of demand is this?’ ‘I mean what I
      say,’ says the other chap. ‘Otherwise,’ he says, ‘I will put your eldest
      son in gaol. I can prove that your eldest son has had something to do with
      the murder of the gallant Chief of Police.’”
     </p>
<p>
      “They give?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Some give, some escort you out of the door,” replied Ostrov.
    </p>
<p>
      “A lovely crowd!” observed Trirodov contemptuously. “And what may you be
      planning now?”
     </p>
<p>
      With the same involuntary obedience Ostrov told Trirodov how their company
      was conspiring to steal a miracle-performing ikon from a neighbouring
      monastery. The plan was to burn the ikon and to sell the precious stones
      with which it was covered. It was a difficult affair, as the ikon was
      under guard. But Ostrov’s friends were counting on taking advantage of one
      of the summer feasts, when the monks, escorting distinguished pilgrims,
      would have drunk freely. The thieves had still a month in which to make
      preparations for the theft; they meant to make use of this time by
      becoming friendly with the monks, and in this way familiarize themselves
      with all the conditions.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov, having listened without interrupting, said to Ostrov:
    </p>
<p>
      “Forget that you have told me all this. Goodbye.”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov gave a start. He appeared as if he had just awakened. Without
      comprehending the causes of his oppressive confusion he bade his host
      goodbye and left.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov decided that the bishop of the local diocese must be warned of
      the contemplated theft of the miracle-performing ikon.
    </p>
<p>
      Bishop Pelagius lived in the monastery in which the ikon of the Mother of
      God, so revered by the people, was preserved. The relics of an old sainted
      monk were preserved in the same monastery. Men came from all ends of
      Russia to worship these holy relics. That was why this monastery was
      considered wealthy.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov thought for a long time as to how he might best inform the bishop
      of the contemplated theft. The thought of writing an anonymous letter was
      repugnant to him. He decided that it was better to speak to the bishop in
      person, or to write him a letter with his real name. But then the question
      remained as to how to explain his own knowledge of the conspiracy. He
      himself might be suspected as an accomplice of the criminals. As it was,
      the local townsmen had none too friendly an eye for Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      He dreaded entangling himself in this dark affair. He already began to
      feel vexed with himself for his strange curiosity that impelled him to
      question Ostrov about his affairs. It would have been better perhaps if he
      were ignorant of the conspiracy. In any case, Trirodov saw clearly that it
      was impossible for him to maintain silence. He thought that the dark
      aspects of monastic life did not justify the evil deed planned by Ostrov’s
      companions. Besides, the consequences of this deed might well prove very
      dangerous.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov decided that there was nothing left for him to do but to pay a
      visit to the monastery. Once on the spot, he thought that some opportunity
      of informing the bishop would occur to him. But as this visit was very
      unpleasant to him, he delayed it a very long time.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0018" name="link2HCH0018"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XVIII
    </h2>
<p>
      Trirodov at last realized that he was in love with Elisaveta. He knew too
      well the nature of this delicious and painful emotion. It had come again
      and once more filled the world with light. He had looked enigmatically
      upon this broad, eternally inaccessible world, full of past memories and
      past people. But his love of Elisaveta meant his love and acceptance of
      the world, the whole world.
    </p>
<p>
      This emotion aroused dismay in Trirodov. To the perplexities of the past,
      not yet thrown off his shoulders, and to those of the present begun with a
      strange, as yet unmeasured influence, were to be added the perplexities of
      the future, of a new and unexpected bond. And was not love in itself a
      means for realizing one’s dreams?
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov made effort to crush this new love in himself, and to forget
      Elisaveta. He tried to keep away from the Rameyevs, not to come to their
      house—but with each day his love only increased. His thoughts and
      musings of Elisaveta grew more and more persistent. They became interwoven
      with one another and grafted themselves on to his soul. More and more a
      pencil in his hand guided itself to outline on paper now her austere
      profile—softened by the youthful joy of liberation—now her
      simple costume, now a rapid sketch of her shoulders and neck, or the knot
      of her broad belt.
    </p>
<p>
      Again and again a strong hope awakened in him that he might strangle and
      crush the gentle blossom of his delicious love. Several days had already
      passed without his visiting the Rameyevs. He did not even come on those
      days on which they grew accustomed to expect him.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta thought this a deliberate incivility, and it hurt her feelings.
      But whenever Piotr abused him she defended him. Her imagination began to
      evoke more and more frequently the features of his face: his deep,
      observing glance; his proud, ironic smile; his pale face, clean-shaven
      like an actor’s, and cold like a mask. How sweetly and how bitterly she
      was in love with him—her sweet vision betrayed itself in the gleam
      in her eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      Rameyev had grown fond of Trirodov, and he missed his presence. He found
      it a pleasant diversion to chat with Trirodov, and even to wrangle with
      him sometimes. He made two calls at Trirodov’s house, and did not find him
      in. Rameyev wrote several invitations. He received courteous but evasive
      replies expressing regret at not being able to come.
    </p>
<p>
      One evening Rameyev growled at Piotr:
    </p>
<p>
      “He stopped coming because of your rudeness.” Piotr replied sharply:
    </p>
<p>
      “Let him stay away. I’m very glad.”
     </p>
<p>
      Rameyev looked at him sternly, and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “But I’m not glad. There’s one interesting man in this wilderness, and we
      frighten him away.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr excused himself. He felt uneasy. He walked out of the house alone,
      aimlessly, wishing only to escape his own relatives.
    </p>
<p>
      The sunset blazed for a long time, tormented itself with its unwillingness
      to die; it lingered on as if it were its last day, and at last expired.
      The whole sky became blue—exquisitely blue. But to the north-west an
      edge of it was translucently green. The quiet stars trembled in the blue
      heights. The moon, which had looked for some time a pale white in the
      luminous clearness, now rose yellow and distinct. Almost total darkness
      covered the earth. There was a coolness along the bank of the river—after
      the hot day. There was an odour of a forest fire, and it, too, softened
      its unpleasant, malignant bitterness in the dark evening coolness. A
      green-haired, green-eyed water-nymph bathed near the low, dark dam; she
      splashed about in the water, which struck the obstruction with a brittle
      sound, and in rhythmic response to it the stream laughed most sonorously.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr walked quietly upon the path along the river-bank, and thought of
      Elisaveta sadly and languorously—or rather, he recalled her—evoked
      her in vision—involuntarily yielded himself to the melancholy play
      of the nervous fantasies of his brain. The peaceful silence of the
      evening, so much at one with him, said to him without words, yet
      comprehensibly, that the pitch of his soul was too quiet, too feeble for
      Elisaveta, who was so strong, so erect, and so simple.
    </p>
<p>
      He had so little audacity—so little daring. He only believed in
      Christ, in Antichrist, in his love, in her indifference—he only
      believed! He only sought for the truth, and could not create it—he
      could evoke neither a god from nonentity, nor a devil from dialectical
      argument; neither a conquering love from carnal emotions, nor a conquering
      hate from stubborn “Noes.” And he loved Elisaveta! He had loved her a long
      time, with a jealous and helpless love.
    </p>
<p>
      He loved! What sadness! The languor of the springtide and the joyousness
      of the morning breeze—the distant ringing of bells—tears in
      one’s eyes—and she will smile—pass by—the dear one! What
      sadness! How dark everything is upon this earth—love as well as
      indifference.
    </p>
<p>
      Suddenly Piotr saw Trirodov quite near him. Trirodov was walking straight
      upon Piotr, as if he did not see him; he moved quickly, almost
      automatically, like a mechanical doll. He held a hat in the hand that hung
      loose at his side—his face was pale—he had a wild look—his
      eyes were aflame. He uttered disconnected words. He walked so impetuously
      that Piotr had no time to turn aside. They came face to face, almost
      colliding with one another. Trirodov gave a start when he saw that he was
      not alone. His face had an expression of fright. Piotr got out of his way
      awkwardly, but Trirodov walked rapidly up to him, and looked intently as
      he turned his own back to the moonlight. Piotr, involuntarily yielding to
      this movement, also turned round. The moon now looked straight into
      Piotr’s handsome face, which seemed pale and strange in the cold, lifeless
      light.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov began in a trembling, agitated voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Ah, that is you?”
     </p>
<p>
      “As you see,” said Piotr in a tone of derision.
    </p>
<p>
      “I didn’t expect to meet you here,” said Trirodov. “I took you for....”
     </p>
<p>
      But he did not finish. Piotr, somewhat vexed, asked him:
    </p>
<p>
      “For whom?”
     </p>
<p>
      Without replying to the question Trirodov inquired:
    </p>
<p>
      “But where? ... There’s no one here. You didn’t hear...?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I wasn’t trained to eavesdropping,” replied Piotr; “all the more since
      these fragments of poetry are inaccessible to me.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Who talks of eavesdropping?” exclaimed Trirodov. “No, I thought that you
      had unwillingly heard some words which might have sounded strange,
      enigmatic, or terrible in your ears.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I came here by chance,” said Piotr. “I was taking a mere stroll, and was
      not here to listen to any one.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov looked attentively at Piotr; then lowered his head with a sigh,
      and said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Forgive me. My nerves are in a bad state. I have grown accustomed to
      living with my fantasies, and in the peaceful society of my quiet
      children. I love seclusion.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Where did your quiet children come from?” asked Piotr somewhat
      contemptuously.
    </p>
<p>
      But Trirodov continued as though he had not heard.
    </p>
<p>
      “Please forgive me. I too often accept for reality that which exists only
      in my imagination. Perhaps always. I live devoted to my dreams.”
     </p>
<p>
      There was so poignant a sadness in these words and in the way they were
      uttered that Piotr felt an involuntary pity for Trirodov. His hate
      strangely vanished—as the moon vanishes at the rising of the sun.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov said with quiet sadness:
    </p>
<p>
      “I have so many strange whims and ways. It is in vain that I go to see
      people. It is far better for me to be alone with my innocent, quiet
      children, with my secrets and dreams.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why better?” asked Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      “I sometimes feel that people interfere with me,” said Trirodov. “They
      weary me in themselves—and no less with their petty, commonplace
      affairs. And what are they to me? There is only one thing of which I can
      be sure—that is myself. It is a great task to be with people. They
      give me so little, and for that they thirstily and malignantly drink my
      whole soul. How often have I left their company exhausted, humiliated,
      crushed. What a holiday for me my solitude is, my sweet solitude! If it
      were only with some one else!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Still you would rather it were with some one else!” replied Piotr with
      sudden malice.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov looked at him steadily and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Life is tragic. She destroys all illusions with the power of her pitiless
      irony. You know, of course, that Elisaveta’s soul is a tragic soul, and
      that a great boldness is necessary in order to approach her, and to say to
      her the great Yes of life. Yes, Elisaveta....”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr’s voice trembled as he shouted in jealous rage:
    </p>
<p>
      “Elisaveta! Why do you mention Elisaveta?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov looked steadily at Piotr. He asked rather slowly—in a
      strangely sounding voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “You are not afraid?”
     </p>
<p>
      “What is there to be afraid of?” replied Piotr morosely. “I am not at all
      a tragic person. My path is clear to me, and I know who guides me.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You don’t know that,” said Trirodov. “Besides, Elena is lovely. He who
      fears to take the grand and the terrible, he who loves tender melodies,
      for him there is Elena.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr was silent. Some sort of new—perhaps alien—thoughts
      swarmed in his head. He listened to them, and suddenly said:
    </p>
<p>
      “You haven’t visited us for a long time, and you are very much liked in
      our house. You would be welcome. You may come when you like, and you may
      talk or be silent, as suits your mood.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov smiled in response.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr Matov returned home quite late in a dazed state of mind. Every one
      had already sat down to supper. Elisaveta glanced at him curiously—as
      if she expected another person there instead of him.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ve come late,” said Piotr confusedly. “I don’t know how I managed to
      wander off so far.”
     </p>
<p>
      He could not understand why he was so flustered. He barely recognized
      Elisaveta dressed up as a boy in her sailor jacket and short breeches. She
      sat so erect there, and smiled her abstract, indifferent smile.
    </p>
<p>
      Elena, blushing for some unknown reason, moved silently closer—and
      there was a strange timorousness in her movement—a timorous desire.
      Piotr complied with her wish, and sat down at her side. She looked at him
      tenderly, lovingly. Her glances touched him. He thought:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why do I not love Elena? Or is it she alone that I really love? Perhaps
      some mistake of the will had dimmed my eyes?”
     </p>
<p>
      He conversed with her gently and tenderly, and as he looked at her again
      and again, a new love took spark in him. It was as if by some prodigious
      power the strange being at the river-bank had instilled this new love into
      him. Elena’s heart beat joyfully.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0019" name="link2HCH0019"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XIX
    </h2>
<p>
      After that evening Trirodov, suppressing his devotion to quiet loneliness,
      once more began to visit the Rameyevs. He resisted no longer the
      all-powerful desire to see Elisaveta, to look into the depth of her blue
      eyes, to listen to the golden sonorousness of her words, and to feel the
      breathing and the witchery of her fresh, primitive strength. It was so
      pleasant to look upon her simple attire, upon the trusting openness of her
      shoulders, upon the light tan of her feet, and upon the austere outlines
      of her face.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta’s sunlit depth became transformed for Trirodov into a blue,
      fathomless height. Elisaveta’s love grew stronger; to grow stronger was
      its desire, and it wished to surmount all intolerable obstacles.
    </p>
<p>
      Rameyev looked at Elisaveta and Trirodov, and he was consumed by a
      strange, mature joy. He seemed to think:
    </p>
<p>
      “They will marry and bring me grandchildren.”
     </p>
<p>
      There were already certain hours in which they expected him. He and
      Elisaveta often remained alone. Something in their natures drew them apart
      from other people, whether strangers or kin. They would go off somewhere
      into a neglected part of the garden, where under the spread net of superb
      black poplars the agreeable aroma of thyme reached them with a gentle
      poignancy—and here they loved to chat with one another.
    </p>
<p>
      Had he been alone instead of with Elisaveta, he could not have expressed
      his thoughts more simply or more candidly. They spoke of so many things—they
      tried, as it were, to contain the whole world within the rigid bounds of
      rapid words.
    </p>
<p>
      As they strolled along the high bank of the river, under the broad shadows
      of the mighty black poplars and strange black maples, and listened to the
      loud, cheerful twitter of the birds that came to the bushes, Elisaveta
      said:
    </p>
<p>
      “The sensation of existence and of the fullness and joy of life is
      delicious. A new sky seems to have opened above my head, and for the first
      time the violets and the lilies of the valley besprinkled with their first
      dew have begun to bloom for me; and for the first time May-drinks made
      from herbs by young housewives taste delicious.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov smiled sadly and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I feel the heavy burden of life. But what’s to be done? I don’t know
      whether life can be made more easy and tranquil.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why desire ease and tranquillity in life?” asked Elisaveta. “I want fire
      and passion, even if I perish. Let me become consumed in the fire of
      rapture and revolt.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said Trirodov, “it is necessary to discover all the possibilities
      and forces within oneself, and then a new life may be created. I wonder if
      life is necessary?”
     </p>
<p>
      “And what is necessary?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “I don’t know,” answered Trirodov sadly.
    </p>
<p>
      “What do you desire?” she asked again.
    </p>
<p>
      “Perhaps I desire nothing,” said Trirodov. “There are moments when I seem
      to expect nothing from life; I do what I do unwillingly, as if it were a
      disagreeable action.”
     </p>
<p>
      “How do you live then?” asked Elisaveta in astonishment.
    </p>
<p>
      He replied:
    </p>
<p>
      “I live in a strange and unreal world. I live—but life goes past me,
      always past me. Woman’s love, the fire of youth, the stirring of young
      hopes, remain for ever within the forbidden boundaries of unrealized
      possibilities—who knows?—perhaps unrealizable.”
     </p>
<p>
      The sad, flaming moments of silence were marked by the heavy beats of
      Elisaveta’s heart. She felt intensely vexed by these sad words of weakness
      and of dejection, and she did not believe them. But Trirodov went on
      speaking, and his beautiful but hopelessly sad words sounded like a taunt
      to her:
    </p>
<p>
      “There is so much labour and so little consolation. Life passes by like a
      dream—a senseless, tormenting dream.”
     </p>
<p>
      “If only a radiant dream! If only a tempestuous dream!” exclaimed
      Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov smiled and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “The time of awakening is drawing nearer. Old age comes with its
      depression; and the empty, meaningless life wanders on towards unknown
      borders. You ask yourself, and it seems hopeless to find a worthy answer:
      ‘Why do I live in this strange and chance form? Why have I chosen my
      present lot? Why have I done this?’”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, who is at fault here?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov replied:
    </p>
<p>
      “The conscience, ripened to universal fullness, says that every fault is
      my fault.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And that every action is my action,” added Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “An action is so impossible!” said Trirodov. “A miracle is impossible. I
      wish to break loose from the claims of this dull existence.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You speak of love,” said Elisaveta, “as of a thing unrealized. But you
      had a wife.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said Trirodov sadly. “The short moments passed by rapidly. Was
      there love? I cannot say. There was passion, a smouldering—and
      death.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Life will again bring its delights to you,” said Elisaveta confidently.
    </p>
<p>
      And Trirodov answered:
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, it will be a different life, but what’s that to me? If one could
      only be quite different, and simple—say a small child, a boy with
      bare feet, with a fishing-rod in his hands, his mouth yawning
      good-naturedly. Only children really live. I envy them frightfully. I envy
      frightfully the simple folk, the altogether simple folk, remote from these
      cheerless comprehensions of the intellect. Children live—only
      children. Ripeness already marks the beginning of death.”
     </p>
<p>
      “To love—and to die?” asked Elisaveta with a smile.
    </p>
<p>
      She listened to the sound of these beautiful, sad words and repeated them
      quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “To love—and to die!”
     </p>
<p>
      And as she listened again, she heard him say:
    </p>
<p>
      “She loved—and she died.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What was the name of your first wife?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      She was amazed at herself for uttering the word “first,” as there had been
      only one; and her face became suffused slowly with pink.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov fell into thought; he appeared not to have heard her question,
      and was silent. Elisaveta did not repeat it. He suddenly smiled and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “You and I feel ourselves to be living people here, and what can there be
      for us more certain than our life, our sensation of life? And yet it is
      possible that you and I are not living people at all, but only characters
      in a novel, and that the author of this novel is not at all concerned with
      its external verisimilitude. His capricious imagination had taken this
      dark earth for its material, and out of this dark, sinful earth he grew
      these strange black maples and these mighty black poplars and these
      twittering birds in the bushes and us.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta looked at him in astonishment and said with a smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “I hope that the novel will be interesting and beautiful. Let it even end
      in death! But tell me, why do you write so little?”
     </p>
<p>
      With unexpected passion, almost with exasperation, Trirodov replied:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why should I write volumes of tales on how they fell in love and why they
      fell out of love, and all that? I write only that which comes from myself,
      that which has not yet been said. So much has already been said; it is far
      better to add a simple word of one’s own than write volumes of
      superfluities.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Eternal themes are always one and the same,” said Elisaveta. “Do they not
      constitute the content of great art?”
     </p>
<p>
      “We never originate,” said Trirodov. “We always appear in the world with a
      ready inheritance. We are the eternal successors. That is why we are not
      free. We see the world with others’ eyes, the eyes of the dead. But I live
      only when I make everything my own.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
      And while these two spent their hours in conversing, Piotr usually made
      his way somewhere to the top of the house. He sometimes descended with his
      eyes red—red from tears or from the vigorous, high wind. His days
      dragged on miserably. His hate and jealousy of Trirodov now and again
      tormented him.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr sometimes made unpleasant, pitiful scenes before Elisaveta. He loved
      her and he hated her. He would have killed her—had he dared! And he
      had not the force to hate either Elisaveta or Trirodov to the bitter end.
    </p>
<p>
      When he learned to know Trirodov better his hate lost something of its
      venom, his malice no longer irritated him like nettles. He looked with
      curiosity upon them and began to understand. The agony of his unconscious
      fury was replaced by a clear contemplation of the separating abyss; and
      this made him even more miserable.
    </p>
<p>
      He decided to go away; he made the decision again and again, but always
      remained there—restless and yearning.
    </p>
<p>
      As for Misha, he fell quite in love with Trirodov. He liked to remain with
      Elisaveta in order to talk about him.
    </p>
<p>
      One evening Piotr came to Trirodov’s house. He did not like to go there,
      for such antagonistic feelings wrestled in his soul! But common courtesy
      made the visit necessary.
    </p>
<p>
      Again a discussion was started. In Piotr’s opinion revolution was to the
      detriment of religion and culture. It was a tedious, unnecessary
      discussion. But Piotr could never resist uttering malicious words against
      the extremes of the “liberating movement.”
     </p>
<p>
      He felt awkward during the whole visit. He wished to handle something all
      the time and to be doing something. His restlessness tormented him in a
      strange way. Now he picked up one trifle from the table, now another, and
      put it down again. He took a prism in his hand. Trirodov trembled. He said
      something quietly and inaudibly. Piotr did not hear, but kept on looking
      in astonishment at the heavy prism in his hand; and as he turned it over
      and over he wondered at the reason of its weight. Trirodov trembled
      nervously. Piotr, in turning the prism rather awkwardly, struck it against
      the edge of the table. Trirodov shivered, shouted something incoherently,
      and, snatching the prism from Piotr’s hands, said in an agitated voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Please put it down!”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr looked in astonishment at Trirodov, who was visibly confused. Piotr
      smiled unwillingly and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why, what is it?”
     </p>
<p>
      “How should I tell you!” said Trirodov. “It is connected with ... Please
      forgive my sharpness. I thought you were going to drop it, and I wanted
      to.... It seems like a whim.... Of course it is really nothing ... but it
      is connected with an old episode in my life. Really, I don’t know why I
      keep these ugly things on my table. But there are such intimate memories
      ... you understand.... Still, I’m so very sorry....”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr listened in perplexity. Suddenly he realized that it was rude to be
      silent for so long, and he made haste to say, not without embarrassment:
    </p>
<p>
      “Please don’t think about it. I quite well understand that there are
      things which.... But if you find it difficult or unpleasant to speak about
      it, then please....”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov said a few more incoherent, confused words of apology to Piotr
      and thanked him. He breathed a sigh of relief when Stchemilov was
      announced.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr let loose his irritation at the new-comer with the ironic question:
    </p>
<p>
      “Again free? For how long?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’ve skipped,” answered Stchemilov calmly. “I’m leading an illegal life
      now.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr soon left.
    </p>
<p>
      “To-day?” asked Stchemilov. “Here?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, we’ll meet here to-day,” replied Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “He hasn’t left yet, and there are several matters and reports to attend
      to. It is necessary to arrange a meeting and to let various people know
      about it.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You have a convenient house here,” said Stchemilov. “May I help myself?”
       he added, pointing at the box of cigars as he lounged back comfortably on
      the large sofa. “Most convenient,” he repeated, as he lit his cigar. “They
      don’t suspect us as yet, but if they should pay you a visit, there are so
      many exits and entrances here and out-of-the-way nooks.... Very convenient
      indeed. It is easy to hide things here—no comparison at all with my
      little trunk.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0020" name="link2HCH0020"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XX
    </h2>
<p>
      The town was in a state of unrest: strikes were in the air, patriotic
      demonstrations were held. Its outer environs were visited by
      suspicious-looking characters; these distributed proclamations, mostly of
      an illiterate nature, in the villages. The proclamations threatened
      incendiarism if the peasants did not revolt. The incendiaries were to be
      “students,” discharged from the factories on account of the strikes. The
      peasants believed the announcement. In some of the villages watchmen were
      engaged to catch the incendiaries at night.
    </p>
<p>
      Ostrov began to play a noticeable rÃ´le in town. He quickly squandered the
      money he received from Trirodov in drink and in other ways. He did not
      dare as yet to visit Trirodov again, but appeared to be in an expectant
      mood, and remained in town.
    </p>
<p>
      It was here that Ostrov met his old friend Yakov Poltinin.
    </p>
<p>
      Yakov Poltinin and two other members of the Black Hundred were sent from
      the capital at the request of Kerbakh and Zherbenev. The apparent purpose
      of this request was to establish a connexion between the local section of
      the All-Russian Black Hundred union—organized by Kerbakh, Zherbenev,
      and Konopatskaya, the wife of a general—with the central office of
      the organization. The actual purpose, however, as understood by all these
      respected folk, though they ventured to do little more than hint of it to
      one another, was to establish—with the help of the trio—a
      patriotic movement; in short, to strike a blow at the <i>intelligentsia</i>.
    </p>
<p>
      Yakov Poltinin took Ostrov with him to visit the families of the patriots.
      A company of suspicious characters was in town—ready to do anything
      they were bidden. Yakov Poltinin led Ostrov also among this company.
    </p>
<p>
      In the course of the company’s friendly carouse at Poltinin’s apartments
      in a dirty little house on the outskirts of the town, the idea of stealing
      the sacred ikon came into some one’s mind. Poltinin said:
    </p>
<p>
      “There’s no end of precious stones on it of all sorts—diamonds,
      sapphires, and rubies. It took hundred of years to collect them. Little
      Mother Russia, orthodox Russia, has done her best.”
     </p>
<p>
      The thief Potseluytchikov affirmed:
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s certainly worth not less than two million.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You’re putting it on rather thick,” declared Ostrov incredulously.
    </p>
<p>
      “Not at all,” said Poltinin with a knowing look. “Two million is putting
      it mildly—it’s more likely worth three.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And how are you going to dispose of it?” asked Ostrov.
    </p>
<p>
      “I know how,” said Poltinin confidently. “Of course you’d get a trifle
      compared with its real value—still we ought to get a half-million
      out of it.”
     </p>
<p>
      This was followed by blasphemous jests.
    </p>
<p>
      Yakov Poltinin had for some time entertained the secret ambition of
      accomplishing something on a grand scale, something that would cause a lot
      of talk. It is true the murder of the Chief of Police created a deep
      impression. Still, it was hardly as important as the affair he had in
      mind. To steal and destroy the miracle-working ikon—that would be
      something to crow about! Poltinin said:
    </p>
<p>
      “The Socialist Revolutionaries are certain to be blamed for it.
      Expropriation for party purposes—why not? As for us, no one will
      even suspect us.”
     </p>
<p>
      “The priests will never get over it,” declared Molin, a former instructor,
      who was a drunkard and a thief—a jail-bird deprived of his legal
      rights.
    </p>
<p>
      The friends began preparations for the projected theft. Now one of them,
      now another, developed the habit of frequenting the monastery. Ostrov
      especially received an eager welcome there. He pleased, by his external
      piety, the older monks who were in authority. There were a number of
      convivial monks who were especially fond of Ostrov. The monks advised him
      to join the local union of the Black Hundred. They said that it would be
      pleasing to God. They engaged him in religious and patriotic conversations
      and invited him to drink with them.
    </p>
<p>
      Poltinin and Potseluychikov were also well received in the monastery.
    </p>
<p>
      Strange threads are woven into the relations of people at times. Although
      Piotr Matov met Ostrov under unfriendly circumstances, Ostrov managed to
      scrape up an acquaintance even with him. It reached a point when Piotr
      even agreed to make a journey with Ostrov to the monastery.
    </p>
<p>
      Glafira Pavlovna Konopatskaya, the rich widow of a general, was an
      energetic, power-loving woman, and enjoyed considerable influence in town.
      She was a most generous contributor to the various enterprises of the
      Black Hundred. Her house served as the meeting-place of the local branch
      of this All-Russian organization as well as of another secret society,
      which bore the elaborate name of “The Union of Active Combat with
      Revolution and Anarchy.”
     </p>
<p>
      The initiation ceremony of the union was very elaborately exulting.
      Especial efforts were made to attract working men. Each new member was
      presented with a badge, a Browning revolver, and a little money.
    </p>
<p>
      The local patriots used to say about Glafira Pavlovna’s house:
    </p>
<p>
      “Here dwells the Russian spirit, here it smells of Russia!”<a href="#linknote-21" id="linknoteref-21" name="linknoteref-21"><small>21</small></a>
</p>
<p>
      After the meeting it usually smelt of vodka and shag.
    </p>
<p>
      Some of the working men joined these unions for material reasons, others
      from ignorance. The Black Hundred had but a few members from among the
      working class by conviction. The Union of Active Combat attracted people
      who served now one side, now the other, people like Yakov Poltinin, and
      even two or three confirmed revolutionaries. They accepted the Brownings
      and handed them over to members of revolutionary organizations. Members of
      the union did not find this out until quite late.
    </p>
<p>
      Kerbakh and Zherbenev were the most frequent guests at Glafira Pavlovna’s
      cosy, hospitable house. Evil tongues made slander of this, and associated
      her name now with Kerbakh, now with Zherbenev. But this was a calumny. Her
      heart had only a place for a young official who served as a private
      secretary to the Governor.
    </p>
<p>
      Once after dinner at Konopatskaya’s, Kerbakh and Zherbenev were telling
      Glafira Pavlovna about Ostrov. Kerbakh was the first to broach the
      subject:
    </p>
<p>
      “I have in view a man whom I should like to call to your attention.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I too know a lively chap,” said Zherbenev.
    </p>
<p>
      Kerbakh, annoyed at the interruption, looked none too amiably at
      Zherbenev, and went on:
    </p>
<p>
      “He didn’t at all please me at first.”
     </p>
<p>
      “My friend also did not appeal to me at the beginning,” said Zherbenev,
      who would not stay repressed.
    </p>
<p>
      “To look at him you might think that he’s a cut-throat,” said Kerbakh.
    </p>
<p>
      “That describes my man too,” announced Zherbenev, as if he were announcing
      something gay and pleasant.
    </p>
<p>
      “But at heart,” went on Kerbakh, “he is an ingenuous infant and an
      enthusiastic patriot.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, well, and mine’s like that too,” chimed in Zherbenev.
    </p>
<p>
      Glafira Pavlovna smiled graciously at both of them.
    </p>
<p>
      “Whom are you talking about?” asked Kerbakh at last, rather annoyed at his
      companion.
    </p>
<p>
      Zherbenev replied:
    </p>
<p>
      “There is a chap here—what’s his name? You remember we met him at
      the pier some time ago. He was rather interested in Trirodov.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You mean Ostrov?” ventured Kerbakh.
    </p>
<p>
      “That’s the fellow,” said Zherbenev.
    </p>
<p>
      “I also meant him,” said Kerbakh.
    </p>
<p>
      “Excellent!” exclaimed Zherbenev. “We seem to agree about him. So you see,
      Glafira Pavlovna, we ought to invite him into our union. He would be a
      most useful man. Once mention Jews to him and he begins to howl like a dog
      on a chain.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Of course we ought to have him,” decided Glafira Pavlovna. “It is just
      such people that we want.”
     </p>
<p>
      That was how Ostrov came to be admitted into the union. He worked very
      zealously on its behalf.
    </p>
<p>
      One of the chief functions of the Black Hundred was to lodge information
      against certain people. They informed the Governor and the head of the
      District Schools that Trirodov’s wards had been at the funeral of the
      working men killed in the woods.
    </p>
<p>
      The colony established by Trirodov had for some time been a source of
      great annoyance and scandal to the townsfolk. Complaints had been lodged
      with the authorities even earlier. Ostrov communicated considerable
      information, mostly invented by himself or by the alert townsmen. The head
      of the schools sent an order to the Headmaster of the National Schools to
      make an investigation. The Governor took other measures. Clouds were
      beginning to gather over Trirodov’s colony.
    </p>
<p>
      The union also made no little effort to arouse the hooligan part of the
      population against the Jews and against the <i>intelligentsia</i>.
    </p>
<p>
      The town was in a state of ferment. The Cossacks often paraded the
      streets. The working men eyed them with hostility. Some one spread rumours
      about town that preparations were being made for an armed revolt. Trifling
      causes led to tragic collisions.
    </p>
<p>
      One evening the Summer Garden was full of people; they were strolling or
      else listening to the music and to the songs in the open-air theatre. The
      evening was quiet and the sky still red. Just outside the rail-fence the
      dust was flying before the wind, and settled now on the pointed leaves of
      the acacia-trees, now on the small, light purple flowers near the road.
    </p>
<p>
      There was a rose-red glow in the sky; the road stretched towards it; and
      the grey of the dust mingling with the red glow produced a play of colour
      very agreeable to the eye.
    </p>
<p>
      A red giant genie broke his vessel with its Solomon’s seal, freed himself,
      and stood on the edge of the town; he laughed soundlessly yet repugnantly.
      His breath was like the smoky breath of a forest fire. But he made
      sentimental grimaces, tore white petals from gigantic marguerites, and
      whispered in a hoarse voice which stirred the blood of the young:
    </p>
<p>
      “He loves me—he loves me not; he will cut me up—he will hang
      me.”
     </p>
<p>
      But the people did not see him. They were looking at the sky and saying:
    </p>
<p>
      “How superb! I love nature! And do you love nature?”
     </p>
<p>
      Others looked on indifferently and thought that it did not matter. The
      lovers of nature bragged before these because they admired the splendid
      sunset and were able to enjoy nature. They said to the others:
    </p>
<p>
      “You, old chap, are a dry stick. I suppose you’d rather go to a stuffy
      room and play cards.”
     </p>
<p>
      The promenaders strolled on, crowding and jostling each other; they were
      flaunting their gaiety. There was a cheerful hum, and young girls, amused
      by schoolboys and officials, giggled. Grey devilkins mingled with the
      crowd, and when the little jokers-pokers hopped on the girls’ shoulders
      and poked their shaggy and ticklish little paws into the corsage under the
      chemise the girls raised piercing screams. They were dressed prettily and
      lightly, in holiday order. Their high breasts outlined under their
      coloured textures taunted the youths.
    </p>
<p>
      An officer of the Cossacks was among those on the promenade. He had had a
      drop too much, which made his face red. He was in a gay mood, and he began
      to boast:
    </p>
<p>
      “We’ll cut their heads off, yes, of all of them!”
     </p>
<p>
      The petty tradesmen treated him to drinks, embraced him, and said to him:
    </p>
<p>
      “Cut their throats. Do us the favour. Make a good job of it. It will serve
      these anathemas right too! As for the women and the girls, give them a
      hiding—the hotter the better.”
     </p>
<p>
      There was a continuous change of amusements, each noisier and duller than
      the one before. Now in the theatre, now in the open, they played a stupid
      but obscene vaudeville piece, and vicious topical songs were sung (a
      thunder of applause); an animated chansonnette-singer screeched and pulled
      about with her naked, excessively whitened shoulders, and winked with her
      exaggeratedly painted eyes; a woman acrobat, raising her legs, attired in
      pink tights, above her head, was dancing on her hands.
    </p>
<p>
      Everything was as if the town were not under guard and as if the Cossacks
      were not riding about in the streets.
    </p>
<p>
      Suddenly some one in the depth of the garden raised a cry.
    </p>
<p>
      A frightful confusion spread among the crowd. Many darted impetuously
      towards the exit. Others jumped over the fence. Suddenly the crowd, with
      frenzied cries, came sweeping in retreat from the exits back into the
      depth of the garden.
    </p>
<p>
      Cossacks darted in from somewhere and, crying savagely, made their way
      along the garden paths. Their sudden appearance gave the impression that
      they were waiting somewhere near by for the command. Their knouts began to
      work rapidly. The thin textures upon the girls’ shoulders were rent apart
      and delicate bodies were unbared, and beautiful blue-and-red spots showed
      themselves on the white-pink skin like quickly ripened flowers. Drops of
      blood, large like bilberries, splattered into the air, which had already
      quenched its thirst on the evening coolness, on the odour of the foliage
      and the aroma of artificial scents. Delicately shrill, loud sobs were the
      accompaniment to the dull, flat lashings of whips across the bodies.
    </p>
<p>
      They threw themselves this way and that way, they ran where they could.
      Several were caught—ragged young men and girls with short hair. Two
      or three of the girls were caught and beaten in error: they were from the
      most peaceful, even respected, families in town. These were afterwards
      permitted to go free.
    </p>
<p>
      The hooligans were making merry in a dirty, ill-smelling beerhouse. They
      were celebrating something or another, were jingling their money,
      discussing future earnings, and laughing uproariously. One table was
      especially absorbed in its noisy gaiety. There sat the celebrated
      town-rowdy Nil Krasavtsev with three of his friends. They drank, and sang
      hooligan songs, then paid their bill and went out. One could hear their
      savage outbursts:
    </p>
<p>
      “The Jew dogs are rebels, they are against the Tsar.”
     </p>
<p>
      “The Jews want to get hold of everything for themselves.”
     </p>
<p>
      “It wouldn’t be a bad thing to cut up a Jewess!”
     </p>
<p>
      “The Jews want to take over the whole earth.”
     </p>
<p>
      It had grown dark. The hooligans went into the main street, the Sretenka.
      It was very quiet, and only a few passers-by were to be met with; people
      stood here and there at their gates and talked. A Jewish widow sat at the
      gate of a house and chatted with her neighbour, a Jewish tailor. Her
      children, a whole throng of them, one smaller than the other, played about
      here, deeply wrapt in their own affairs.
    </p>
<p>
      Nil walked up to the Jewess and shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “You dog of a Jew, pray to God for the orthodox Tsar!”
     </p>
<p>
      “What do you want of me?” cried the Jewess. “I’m not touching you; you had
      better go away!”
     </p>
<p>
      “What’s that you say?” shouted the hooligan.
    </p>
<p>
      A broad knife was lifted in the darkness and, gleaming, came down in a
      swoop, piercing the old woman. She gave a quick, shrill cry—and fell
      back dead. The Jew, terrified, ran away, filling the night air with his
      piteous wails. The children began to whimper. The hooligans marched off,
      laughing uproariously.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0021" name="link2HCH0021"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXI
    </h2>
<p>
      Midday. It was quiet, innocent, and fresh in the depth of the wood, at the
      edge of the hollow—and the outer heat penetrated hither only by an
      infinite coiling as of a scaly serpent impotent at last and deprived of
      its poison.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov had found this place for himself and Elisaveta. More than once
      they came here together—to read, to talk, and to sit a while at the
      moss-covered stone, out of which, like a strange corporeal ghost, grew up
      all awry a slender quaking ash. Elisaveta, dressed in her simple short
      skirt, her long sunburnt arms and part of her legs showing, seemed so
      tall, so erect, and so graceful at this moss-covered stone.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta was reading aloud—poems! How golden her voice sounded with
      its seductive, sun-like sonorousness! Trirodov listened with a slightly
      ironical smile to these familiar, infinitely deep and lovely words, so
      seemingly meaningless in life. When she finished Trirodov said:
    </p>
<p>
      “A man’s whole life is barely enough to think out a single idea properly.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You mean to say that each should choose for himself but a single idea.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes. If people could but grasp this fact human knowledge would take an
      unprecedented step forward. But we are afraid to venture.”
     </p>
<p>
      And coarse life already hovered near them behind their backs, and was
      about to intrude upon them. Elisaveta gave a sudden faint outcry at the
      unexpectedness of an unseemly apparition. A dirty, rough-looking man, all
      in tatters, was almost upon them; he had approached them upon the mossy
      ground as softly as a wood fairy. He stretched out a dirty, horny hand,
      and asked, not at all in a begging voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Give a hungry man something to buy bread with.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov frowned in annoyance, and without looking at the beggar took a
      silver coin out of the pocket of his waistcoat. He always kept a trifle
      about him to provide for unexpected meetings. The ragged one smiled,
      turned the coin, threw it upward, caught it, and hid it adroitly in his
      pocket.
    </p>
<p>
      “I thank your illustrious Honour most humbly,” he said. “May God give you
      good health, a rich wife, and assured success. Only I want to say
      something to you.”
     </p>
<p>
      He grew silent, and assumed a grave, important air. Trirodov frowned even
      more intensely than before, and asked stiffly:
    </p>
<p>
      “What is it you wish to tell me?”
     </p>
<p>
      The ragged one said with frank derision in his voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s this. You were reading a book, my good people, but not the right
      one.”
     </p>
<p>
      He laughed a pathetic, insolent laugh. It was as if a timorous dog
      suddenly began to whine hoarsely, insolently, and cautiously.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov asked again in astonishment:
    </p>
<p>
      “Not the right one, why not?”
     </p>
<p>
      The ragged one began to speak with awkward gestures, and he gave the
      impression that he was able to speak well and eloquently, and that he
      merely assumed his stupid, unpolished manner of speaking.
    </p>
<p>
      “I had been listening to you a long time. I was behind the bush there. I
      was asleep, I must confess—then you came—chattered away, and
      waked me. The young lady read well. Clearly and sympathetically. One could
      see at once that it was from the heart. Only I don’t like the contents,
      and all that’s in this book.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why don’t you like it?” asked Elisaveta quietly.
    </p>
<p>
      “In my opinion,” said the ragged one, “it isn’t your style. It doesn’t fit
      you somehow.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What sort of book ought we to read?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      She gave a light, forced smile. The ragged one sat down on a near-by
      stump, and answered in no undue haste:
    </p>
<p>
      “I am not thinking of you alone, honourable folk, but of all those who
      parade in fancy gaiters and in velvet dresses, and look scornfully at our
      brothers.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What book?” again asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s the gospels that you ought to read,” he replied, as he looked
      attentively and austerely at Elisaveta, his glance taking in her entire
      figure from her flushed face down to her feet.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why the gospels?” asked Trirodov, who suddenly grew morose. He appeared
      to be pondering over something, and unable to decide; his indecision
      seemed to torment him.
    </p>
<p>
      The ragged one replied slowly:
    </p>
<p>
      “I will tell you why; you’ll find the true facts there. We will take it
      easy in paradise, while the devils will be pulling the veins out of you in
      hell. And we shall look on coolly, and applaud gaily with our hands. It
      ought to prove entertaining.”
     </p>
<p>
      He burst out into loud, hoarse laughter—but it seemed more assumed
      than joyous, and rather abject and hideous. Elisaveta shivered.
    </p>
<p>
      “What a wicked person you are! Why do you think that?” said Elisaveta
      reproachfully.
    </p>
<p>
      The ragged one glanced at her crossly, and looked fixedly into her deep
      blue eyes; then he said with a broad smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why am I wicked? And are you two good? Wicked or not, the thing is to be
      just. But I may tell you, sir, that I like you,” he said as he turned
      suddenly to Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Thank you for your good opinion,” said Trirodov with a slightly ironical
      smile, “but why should you like me?”
     </p>
<p>
      He looked attentively at the ragged one. Then suddenly he felt depressed
      and apprehensive, and he lowered his eyes. The other slowly lit his
      foul-smelling pipe, stretched himself, and began after a brief silence:
    </p>
<p>
      “Other gentlemen’s mugs are mostly gay, as if they had gorged themselves
      on a pancake with cream, or had successfully forged their uncle’s will.
      But you, sir, seem to have the same lean mug always. I have been observing
      you some time now. It’s evident that you have something on your soul. At
      least a capital crime.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov was silent. He lifted himself on his elbow and looked straight
      into the man’s eyes with such a fixed, strange expression in his
      unblinking, commanding, wilful eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      The ragged one grew silent, as if he had been congealed for a moment.
      Then, as if frightened, he suddenly shook himself. He shrank and stooped,
      and as he took his cap off he revealed an unkempt, tousled head of hair;
      he mumbled something, slipped away among the bushes, and disappeared
      quietly—like a fairy of the wood.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov looked gloomily after him—and was silent. Elisaveta thought
      that he deliberately avoided looking at her. She was intensely
      embarrassed, but made an effort to control herself. She laughed, and said
      with assumed gaiety:
    </p>
<p>
      “What a strange creature!”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov turned upon her his melancholy glances and said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “He talks like one who knows. He talks like one who sees. But no one can
      know what happened.”
     </p>
<p>
      Oh, if one could only know! If one could only change that which once had
      happened!
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov recalled again during these days the dark history of Piotr
      Matov’s father. Trirodov had carelessly entangled himself in this affair,
      and now it compelled him to have dealings with the blackmailer Ostrov.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr’s father, Dmitry Matov, had fallen into a trap which he had set for
      others. He had joined a secret revolutionary circle. There they soon
      discovered his relations with the police, and they decided to detect him
      and kill him.
    </p>
<p>
      One of the members of the circle, the young physician Lunitsin, took the
      role of betrayer upon himself. He promised to obtain for Dmitry Matov
      important documents involving many of the members. They made a bargain at
      a moderate figure. The meeting at which the documents were to be exchanged
      for the money was designated to take place in a small borough close to the
      town in which Trirodov then lived.
    </p>
<p>
      At the appointed hour Dmitry Matov got out of his train at a little
      station. It was late in the evening. Matov wore blue spectacles and a
      false beard, as was agreed upon. Lunitsin waited for him a few yards from
      the station, and led him to a very solitary spot where was situated the
      house hired for the purpose.
    </p>
<p>
      A supper had been prepared there. Matov ate heartily and drank much wine.
      His companion began to invent stories about certain suspicious movements
      he had heard of lately. Little by little Matov grew candid, and began to
      boast of his connexions with the police, and of the great number of people
      he had skilfully betrayed.
    </p>
<p>
      The door leading to the next room was hung with draperies. Three people
      were hiding in that room—Trirodov, Ostrov, and the young working man
      Krovlin. They were listening. Krovlin was intensely excited. He kept on
      repeating in indignant whispers:
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh, the scoundrel! The wretch!”
     </p>
<p>
      Ostrov and Trirodov managed to restrain him with great difficulty.
    </p>
<p>
      “Be silent. Let him babble out everything,” they said to him.
    </p>
<p>
      At last Matov’s impudent boastfulness was too much for Krovlin, who jumped
      out from his hiding-place, and shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “So that’s how it is! You’ve betrayed our men to the police! And you have
      the face to confess it!”
     </p>
<p>
      Dmitry Matov grew green with fear. He shouted to his companion:
    </p>
<p>
      “Kill him! He has been listening to us! Shoot quick! He mustn’t live. He
      will give us both up!”
     </p>
<p>
      At this moment two other men appeared from the same place. Lunitsin aimed
      his revolver straight at Matov’s forehead, and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Who ought to be killed, traitor?”
     </p>
<p>
      Matov then understood that he had been caught in a trap. But he still made
      efforts to wriggle out of it, and called all his skill and his insolence
      to his assistance. They tried him for treachery. At first he defended
      himself. He said that he had deceived the police, and that he had entered
      into relations with them merely to get important information for his
      comrades. But his protestations soon grew weaker. Then he began to beg for
      mercy. He spoke of his wife and of his children.
    </p>
<p>
      Matov’s entreaties failed to impress any one. His judges were adamant. His
      fate was decided. The sentence of hanging was passed unanimously.
    </p>
<p>
      Matov was bound. The noose was already thrown about his neck. Then
      Trirodov intervened:
    </p>
<p>
      “What are you going to do with him? It will be difficult to take him away,
      and it is dangerous to leave him here.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Who will come here?” said Lunitsin. “At best only by chance. Let him hang
      here until he’s found.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Let us bury him here in the garden, like a dog,” suggested Krovlin.
    </p>
<p>
      “Give him to me,” said Trirodov. “I will dispose his body in such a way
      that no one will find it.”
     </p>
<p>
      The others assented eagerly. Ostrov said with a scornful smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “Will you try your chemistry on him, Giorgiy Sergeyevitch? Well, it’s all
      the same to us. A bad man ought to be punished—make even a skeleton
      of him for your use if you like.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov drew a flagon containing a colourless liquid from his pocket.
    </p>
<p>
      “Now this will put him to sleep,” he said.
    </p>
<p>
      He injected with a small syringe several drops of the liquid under Dmitry
      Matov’s skin. Matov gave a feeble cry and fell heavily to the floor. In a
      few moments the body lay before them, blue and apparently lifeless.
      Lunitsin examined Matov and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s done for.”
     </p>
<p>
      The men left one by one. Trirodov alone remained with Matov’s body.
      Trirodov took off Matov’s clothes and burned them in the stove. He made
      several more injections of the same colourless liquid.
    </p>
<p>
      The night passed slowly. Trirodov lay on the sofa without taking his
      clothes off. He slept badly, tormented by oppressive dreams. He awoke
      several times.
    </p>
<p>
      Dmitry Matov lay in the next room on the floor. The liquid, injected into
      his blood, acted strangely. The body contracted in proper proportion, and
      wasted very quickly. Within several hours it lost more than half of its
      weight, and assumed very small dimensions; it became very soft and pliant.
      But all its proportions were faithfully preserved.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov made up the body into a large parcel, covered it over with plaid,
      and bound it with straps. It resembled a pillow wrapped up in plaid.
      Trirodov left by the morning train for home, carrying with him Dmitry
      Matov’s body.
    </p>
<p>
      At home Trirodov put the body into a vessel containing a greenish liquid
      compounded by himself. Matov’s body shrunk in it even more. It had become
      barely more than seven inches long. But as before all its proportions
      remained inviolate.
    </p>
<p>
      Then Trirodov prepared a special plastic substance, in which he wrapped
      Matov’s body. He pressed it compactly into the form of a cube, and placed
      it on his writing-table. And thus a thing that once had been a man
      remained there a thing among other things.
    </p>
<p>
      Nevertheless Trirodov was right when he told Ostrov that Matov had not
      been killed. Yes, notwithstanding his strange form and his distressing
      immobility, Dmitry Matov was not dead. The potentiality of life slept
      dormant in that solid object. Trirodov thought more than once as to
      whether the time had not come to rehabilitate Matov and return him to the
      world of the living.
    </p>
<p>
      He had not decided upon this before. But he was confident that he would
      succeed in doing this without hindrance. The process of rehabilitation
      required a tranquil and isolated place.
    </p>
<p>
      In a little more than a year at the beginning of the summer Trirodov
      decided to begin the process of rehabilitation. He prepared a large vat
      over six feet in length. He filled it with a colourless liquid, and
      lowered into it the cube containing Matov’s body.
    </p>
<p>
      The slow process of rehabilitation began. Unperceived by the eye, the cube
      began to thaw and to swell. It needed a half-year before it would thaw out
      sufficiently to permit the body to peer through.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0022" name="link2HCH0022"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXII
    </h2>
<p>
      Sonya Svetilovitch was badly shaken by the hard, cruel events of that
      night in the woods. She fell ill, and remained two weeks in an unconscious
      state. It was feared that she would die. But she was a strong girl and
      conquered her illness.
    </p>
<p>
      Scenes from that nightmarish occasion passed before the poor girl in her
      heavy delirium. Grey, ferocious demons, with dim, tinny eyes, came to her,
      taunted her, and acted without reason. There was no place in which to hide
      from the hideous frenzy.
    </p>
<p>
      Deep oppression reigned in the Svetilovitch house. Sonya’s mother wept,
      and bewailed her lot. Sonya’s father spoke of the matter warmly and
      eloquently, with gesticulations, to his friends in his study—and
      inevitably got into a state of indignation. Sonya’s little brothers
      discussed plans of vengeance. Fräulein Berta, the governess of Sonya’s
      younger sister, made censorious remarks about barbarous Russia.
    </p>
<p>
      All the acquaintances of the Svetilovitches were also indignant. But their
      indignation assumed only platonic forms. Perhaps it was impossible for it
      to have been otherwise. To be sure, all the more or less independent
      people in town paid the Svetilovitches visits of sympathy. Even the
      liberal Inspector of Taxes came. He was a patient of Doctor
      Svetilovitch’s, and came during the reception hour to express his
      interest; incidentally he asked advice about his physical indispositions
      and paid no fee—in view of its being a visit of sympathy.
    </p>
<p>
      Sonya’s father, Doctor Sergey Lvovitch Svetilovitch, was a member of the
      Constitutional Democratic Party; among his own he was regarded as
      belonging to the extreme left wing. Like his friend Rameyev, who was a
      Cadet of more moderate views, he was a member of the local committee.
    </p>
<p>
      Doctor Svetilovitch thought he ought to protest against the improper
      actions of the police. He lodged complaints with the Governor and the
      District Attorney, and wrote circumstantial petitions to both—his
      chief concern being that no offending expression of any sort should enter
      into them.
    </p>
<p>
      Doctor Svetilovitch was an extremely correct and loyal man. Other people
      around him, if placed in unusual circumstances, might lose their presence
      of mind and forget their principles; others around him, friends or
      enemies, might act incorrectly and illegally; but Doctor Svetilovitch
      always remained faithful to himself. No circumstance, no earthly or
      heavenly power, could swerve him from the path which he acknowledged as
      the only true one, in so far as it conformed to Constitutional Democratic
      principles. The problem of expedience of conduct concerned Doctor
      Svetilovitch but little. The important thing was to be correct in
      principle. He always placed, however, the responsibility for the result
      this procedure achieved upon the shoulders of those who wished to follow
      along other lines. That was why Doctor Svetilovitch enjoyed extraordinary
      respect in his own party. Great weight was attached to his opinions, and
      in the matter of tactics his declarations were indisputable.
    </p>
<p>
      Several days after Doctor Svetilovitch presented his petition he had a
      call from an inspector of the police, who handed him, with a request for a
      receipt, a grey, rough paper impressed at the upper left-hand corner with
      the stamp of the Skorodozh governing authorities, together with a packet
      from the District Attorney. This last contained a white solid-looking page
      of foolscap folded in four, handsomely engraved with the District
      Attorney’s seal. Both the grey rough paper and the solid-looking page of
      foolscap contained approximately in the same words the answers to the
      complaints of Doctor Svetilovitch. These informed Doctor Svetilovitch that
      a very careful investigation had been made in connexion with his
      complaints; in conclusion, it was affirmed that Doctor Svetilovitch’s
      evidence as to the illegal actions of the police, and as to the subjection
      of the girls caught in the woods to blows, was not borne out by facts.
    </p>
<p>
      At last Sonya began to improve. The members of the family and
      acquaintances tried not to recall the sad incident of that night before
      Sonya. Only indifferent and pleasant matters were mentioned in the poor
      girl’s presence in order to divert her. A number of visitors were invited
      one evening for this purpose. Some were asked by letter, others by Doctor
      Svetilovitch in person. He visited the Rameyevs and Trirodov in his
      carriage, which was harnessed to a pair of stout ponies.
    </p>
<p>
      In inviting Trirodov, Doctor Svetilovitch asked him to read something from
      his own work at the gathering, something that would not make Sonya
      unpleasantly reminiscent. Trirodov agreed to this quite heartily, although
      he usually avoided reading his own work anywhere.
    </p>
<p>
      As Trirodov was preparing to leave his house that evening and was putting
      on a coloured tie, Kirsha said to him with his usual gravity:
    </p>
<p>
      “I should not go to the Svetilovitches’ to-night if I were you. It would
      be much wiser to remain at home.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov, not all astonished by this unexpected advice, smiled and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why shouldn’t I go?”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha held his father’s hand and said sadly:
    </p>
<p>
      “There have been many detectives of late poking their noses about here.
      What can they want here? It’s almost certain they will make a search of
      Svetilovitch’s house to-night—I have a presentiment.”
     </p>
<p>
      “That’s nothing,” said Trirodov with a smile, “we have got used to
      everything. But, dear Kirsha, you are very inquisitive—you look in
      everywhere, even where you shouldn’t.”
     </p>
<p>
      “My eyes see, and my ears hear,” replied Kirsha, “is that my fault?”
     </p>
<p>
      In the pleasant, well-appointed drawing-room of the Svetilovitches, in the
      lifeless light of three electric globes with lustrous bronze fittings, the
      green-blue upholsterings of the Empire furniture seemed illusively
      beautiful. The dark curves of the grand piano were gleaming. Albums were
      lying on a little table under the leaves of a palm. The portrait of an old
      man with a long, white moustache smiled down youthfully and cheerfully
      from its place on the wall above the sofa. The visitors gathered in the
      midst of these attractive surroundings, as if there were nothing to mar
      them. They spoke a great deal, with much heat and eloquence.
    </p>
<p>
      Most of the visitors were local Cadets. Among those present were three
      physicians, one engineer, two legal advocates, the editor of a local
      progressive newspaper, a justice of the peace, a notary, three gymnasia
      instructors, and a priest. Nearly all came accompanied by women and girls.
      There were also several students, college girls, and grownup schoolboys
      from the higher gymnasia classes.
    </p>
<p>
      The young priest, Nikolai Matveyevitch Zakrasin, who sympathized with the
      Cadets, gave lessons in Trirodov’s school. He was considered a great
      freethinker among his colleagues, the priests. The town clergy looked
      askance at him. And the Diocesan Bishop was not well disposed towards him.
    </p>
<p>
      Father Zakrasin had completed a course in the ecclesiastical academy. He
      spoke rather well, wrote something, and collaborated not only in religious
      but also in worldly periodicals. He had wavy, dense, not over-long hair.
      His grey eyes smiled amiably and cheerfully. His priestly attire always
      appeared new and neat. His manners were restrained and gentle. He did not
      at all resemble the average Russian priest; Father Zakrasin seemed more
      like a Catholic prelate who had let his beard grow and had put on a golden
      pectoral cross. Father Zakrasin’s house was bright, neat, and cheerful.
      The walls were decorated with engravings, scenes from sacred history. His
      study contained several cases of books. It was evident from their
      selection that Father Zakrasin’s interests were very broad. In general he
      liked that which was certain, convincing, and rational.
    </p>
<p>
      His wife, Susanna Kirillovna, a good-looking, plump, and calm woman, who
      was wholly convinced of the justice of the Cadets’ cause, was now sitting
      quietly on the sofa in the Svetilovitch drawing-room, and expounding
      truths. Notwithstanding her Constitutional Democratic convictions, she was
      a real priest’s spouse, a housewifely, loquacious, timorous creature.
    </p>
<p>
      Priest Zakrasin’s sister, Irina Matveyevna, or Irinushka as every one
      called her, was a parish-school girl who had been won over to the cause by
      the priest’s wife; she was young, rosy, and slender, and greatly resembled
      her brother. She got excited so often and so intensely that she constantly
      had to be appeased by the elders, who regarded her youthful impetuosity
      with benevolent amusement.
    </p>
<p>
      Rameyev was there with both his daughters, the Matov brothers, and Miss
      Harrison. Trirodov was there also.
    </p>
<p>
      There was almost a spirit of gaiety. They talked on various subjects—on
      politics, on literature, on local matters, etc. Sonya’s mother sat in the
      drawing-room and discussed women’s rights and the works of Knut Hamsun.
      Sonya’s mother liked this writer intensely, and loved to tell about her
      meeting with him abroad. There was an autographed portrait of Knut Hamsun
      upon her table and it was the object of much pride for the whole
      Svetilovitch family.
    </p>
<p>
      At the tea-table in the small neighbouring room, which was called the
      “buffet,” Sonya—surrounded by young people—was pouring out
      tea. In Doctor Svetilovitch’s study they spoke of the recent unrest in
      near-by villages. There were incendiary fires on various estates and farms
      belonging to the landed gentry. There were several cases in which the
      bread granaries belonging to certain hoarders were broken into.
    </p>
<p>
      Sonya’s mother was asked to play something. She refused a long time, but
      finally, with evident pleasure, went to the grand piano, and played a
      selection from Grieg. Then the notary took his turn at the instrument.
      Irinushka, blushing furiously, sang with much expression the new popular
      song to his accompaniment:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  <i>Once I loved a learned student,
  I admit I wasn’t prudent;
  On the day I married him
  The village feasted to the brim.

  Vodka every one was drinking,
  All were doing loud thinking—
  How to make the masters toil,
  And amongst us share their soil.

  Suddenly there came a copper
  Right into our hut a-flopper!
  “I’ll send you both to Sakhalin<a href="#linknote-22" id="linknoteref-22" name="linknoteref-22">22</a>
  For raising this rebellious din.”
 
  “Well, my dear one, quick, get ready,
  Mind that you walk ‘long there steady,
  For your charming words, my sweet,
  A gaol is waiting you to greet.”
 
  Do you think I was agitated?
  No, not me—I was most elated.
  Then the muzhiks stepped right in
  And chucked him out on the green.</i>
</pre>
<p>
      This song was an illustration appropriate to the discussions on village
      tendencies. It achieved a great success. Irinushka was profusely praised
      and thanked for it. Irinushka blushed, and regretted that she knew no
      other songs of the same kind.
    </p>
<p>
      Then Trirodov read his story of a beautiful and exultant love. He read
      simply and calmly, not as actors read. He finished reading and in the cold
      polite praises he felt how remote he was from all these people. Once more,
      as it frequently had happened before, there stirred in his soul the
      thought: “Why do I come to see these people?”
     </p>
<p>
      “There is so little in common between them and me,” thought Trirodov. Only
      Elisaveta’s smile and word consoled him.
    </p>
<p>
      Afterwards there was dancing—then card-playing. It was as always, as
      everywhere.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0023" name="link2HCH0023"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXIII
    </h2>
<p>
      No one else was expected. The dining-room table was being set for supper.
      Suddenly there was a loud, violent bell-ring. The housemaid ran quickly to
      answer it. Some one in the drawing-room remarked in astonishment:
    </p>
<p>
      “A rather late visitor.”
     </p>
<p>
      Every one suddenly felt depressed for some reason. There was an air of
      ominous expectancy. Were robbers about to break in? Was it a telegram
      containing an unpleasant announcement? Or would some one come in panting
      and exhausted and divulge a piece of terrible news? But the words they
      addressed to each other were of quite a different nature.
    </p>
<p>
      “But who can it be at such a late hour?” said one woman to another.
    </p>
<p>
      “Who else can it be but Piotr Ivanitch!”
     </p>
<p>
      “That’s so; he likes coming late.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Do you remember—once at the Taranovs?”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr Ivanitch, approaching at that moment, overheard the remark.
    </p>
<p>
      “You are unfair to me, Marya Ivanovna! I’ve been here a long time,” said
      he.
    </p>
<p>
      “Forgive me, but who, then, can it be?” said Marya Ivanovna in confusion.
    </p>
<p>
      “We’ll soon know. Let’s take a look.”
     </p>
<p>
      The inquisitive engineer put his head out into the hall and stumbled upon
      some one in a grey uniform who was walking impetuously towards the
      drawing-room. Some one whispered in suppressed horror:
    </p>
<p>
      “The police!”
     </p>
<p>
      When the maid, in response to the ring, opened the door, several men filed
      into the hall, awkwardly jostling one another—house-porters,<a href="#linknote-23" id="linknoteref-23" name="linknoteref-23"><small>23</small></a>
      gendarmes, detectives, an Inspector of the police, an officer of the
      gendarmerie, two petty constables. The maid stood speechless with fright.
      The police inspector shouted at her:
    </p>
<p>
      “Get back to the kitchen!”
     </p>
<p>
      A detachment of policemen and porters remained outside under the command
      of the Inspector of the constabulary. They watched to see that no one
      entered or left the Svetilovitch house.
    </p>
<p>
      Altogether about twenty policemen entered the house. For some unknown
      reason they were armed with rifles with fixed bayonets. Three
      hideous-looking men in civilian clothes kept close to the policemen. These
      were the detectives. Two policemen stationed themselves at the entrance,
      two others ran to the telephone, which was attached to a wall in the hall.
      It was evident that everything had been arranged beforehand by a manager
      expert in such matters. The rest of the men tumbled into the drawing-room.
      The Inspector of the police stretched his neck and, assuming a tense red
      expression and bulging his eyes, shouted very loudly.
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t any one dare to move from his place!”
     </p>
<p>
      And he looked round in self-satisfaction at the officer of the
      gendarmerie.
    </p>
<p>
      The men and the women remained transfixed in their places, as if they were
      acting a tableau. They were looking silently at the new-comers.
    </p>
<p>
      The policemen, awkwardly holding their rifles, tramped with their
      ponderous boots on the parquet-floor and made their way about the rooms.
      They paused at all the doors, looked at the visitors timorously and
      savagely, uneasily pressed the barrels of their rifles, and tried to look
      like real soldiers. It was evident that these zealous people were ready to
      fire at any one whomsoever at the first suspicious movement: they thought
      that a band of conspirators had gathered here.
    </p>
<p>
      All the rooms were overrun with these strangers. It began to smell of bad
      tobacco, sweat, and vodka. Many of them drank to keep their courage up:
      they were afraid of a possible armed resistance.
    </p>
<p>
      A gendarme placed his Colonel’s voluminous portfolio on the grand piano in
      the drawing-room. The Colonel, stepping forward to the middle of the room,
      so that the light of the centre cluster of lamps fell almost directly upon
      his bald forehead and upon his bushy, sandy-haired moustache, pronounced
      in an official tone:
    </p>
<p>
      “Where’s the master of this house?”
     </p>
<p>
      He made a determined effort to give the impression that he did not know
      Doctor Svetilovitch or the others. Actually he knew nearly all of them
      personally. Doctor Svetilovitch walked up to him.
    </p>
<p>
      “I am the master of this house. I am Doctor Svetilovitch,” he said in a no
      less official tone.
    </p>
<p>
      The Colonel in the blue uniform then announced:
    </p>
<p>
      “M. Svetilovitch, it is my duty to make a search of your house.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doctor Svetilovitch asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Under whose authority are you doing this? And where is your warrant for
      carrying out the search?”
     </p>
<p>
      The Colonel of the gendarmerie turned towards the piano and rummaged in
      his portfolio, but produced nothing. He said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I assure you I have an order. If you have any doubts you can call up on
      the telephone.”
     </p>
<p>
      Then the Colonel turned to the Inspector of the police and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Please collect them all in one room.”
     </p>
<p>
      All, except Doctor Svetilovitch, were compelled to go into the
      dining-room, which now became crowded and uncomfortable. Armed constables
      were placed at both doors—the one entering the hall and the other
      the dining-room—as well as in all the corners. Their faces were
      dull, and their guns seemed unnecessary and absurd in these peaceful
      surroundings—but then the guests felt even more uncomfortable.
    </p>
<p>
      A detective looked out from time to time from the drawing-room door. He
      looked searchingly into the faces. The look he had on his disagreeable
      face with its white eyebrows and eyelashes gave the impression that he was
      sniffing the air.
    </p>
<p>
      In the drawing-room the Colonel of the gendarmerie was saying to Doctor
      Svetilovitch:
    </p>
<p>
      “And now, M. Svetilovitch, will you be so good as to tell me with what
      object you have arranged this gathering?”
     </p>
<p>
      Doctor Svetilovitch replied with an ironic smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “With the object of dancing and dining, nothing more. You can see for
      yourself that we are all peaceable folk.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Very well,” said the Colonel in an authoritative, rude tone. “Are the
      names and families of all gathered here with the object you state known to
      you?”
     </p>
<p>
      Doctor Svetilovitch shrugged his shoulders in astonishment and replied:
    </p>
<p>
      “Of course they are known to me! Why shouldn’t I know my own guests? I
      believe you know many of them yourself.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Be so good,” requested the Colonel, “as to give me the names of all your
      guests.”
     </p>
<p>
      He produced a sheet of paper from his portfolio and placed it on the
      piano. The Colonel wrote the names down as Doctor Svetilovitch gave them.
      When the doctor stopped short the Colonel asked laconically:
    </p>
<p>
      “All?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Doctor Svetilovitch answered as briefly:
    </p>
<p>
      “All.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Show us into your study,” said the Colonel.
    </p>
<p>
      They went into the study and rummaged among everything there. They turned
      over all the books and disarranged the writing-table. They looked through
      the letters. The Colonel demanded:
    </p>
<p>
      “Open the bookcases, the bureau drawers.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doctor Svetilovitch answered: “The keys, as you see, are in their places
      in the locks.”
     </p>
<p>
      He put his hands into his pockets and stood by the window.
    </p>
<p>
      “Will you be good enough to open them?” said the Colonel.
    </p>
<p>
      “I can’t do this,” replied Doctor Svetilovitch. “I do not consider it
      obligatory to help you in your searches.”
     </p>
<p>
      Pride filled his Cadet’s soul. He felt that he was behaving correctly and
      valiantly. What was the consequence? The uninvited guests opened
      everything themselves and rummaged where they pleased. A constable put
      aside all those books which looked suspicious. Several of these books had
      been published in Russia quite openly and sold no less openly. They took
      several books wholly innocent in their contents, simply because they
      thought they detected a rebellious note in their titles.
    </p>
<p>
      The Colonel of the gendarmerie announced:
    </p>
<p>
      “We will take the correspondence and the manuscripts with us.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doctor Svetilovitch said in vexation:
    </p>
<p>
      “I assure you there’s nothing criminal there. The manuscripts are very
      necessary to my work.”
     </p>
<p>
      “We’ll have a look at them,” said the Colonel dryly. “Don’t be concerned
      about them, they will be kept in safety.”
     </p>
<p>
      Then they rummaged the other rooms. They searched the beds to see if there
      were any concealed fire-arms.
    </p>
<p>
      When he returned into the study the Colonel of the gendarmerie said to
      Doctor Svetilovitch:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, try and see if you can find the papers of the strike committee.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I have no such papers,” replied Doctor Svetilovitch.
    </p>
<p>
      “S-so! Now,” said the Colonel very significantly, “tell us frankly where
      you keep the weapons concealed.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What weapons?” asked Doctor Svetilovitch in astonishment.
    </p>
<p>
      The Colonel replied with an ironic smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “Any sort that you may have about—revolvers, bombs, or
      machine-guns.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I haven’t any kind of weapons,” said Doctor Svetilovitch with an amused
      laugh. “I haven’t even a gun for hunting. What kind of weapon can I
      possibly have?”
     </p>
<p>
      “We’ll have a look!” said the Colonel in a meaningful voice.
    </p>
<p>
      They turned the whole house upside down. Of course they found no weapons
      of any kind.
    </p>
<p>
      While all this was going on Trirodov was reading in the dining-room his
      own verses and some which were not his. The constables listened in a dull
      way. They did not understand anything, but waited patiently to see if any
      rebellious words were mentioned, but their waiting remained unrewarded.
    </p>
<p>
      The Inspector of the police then entered the dining-room. Every one looked
      guardedly at him. He said solemnly, as if he were announcing the beginning
      of an important and useful work:
    </p>
<p>
      “Gentlemen, now we must subject all those present to a personal
      examination. One at a time, please. Suppose we begin with you,” said he,
      turning to the engineer.
    </p>
<p>
      The face of the Inspector of the police expressed a consciousness of his
      personal dignity. His movements were sure and significant. It was evident
      that he not only was not ashamed of what he was saying and doing, but that
      he had not the slightest comprehension that there was anything in this to
      be ashamed of. The engineer, a young and handsome man, shrugged his
      shoulders, smiled contemptuously and went into the study, being directed
      there by an awkward motion of the red-palmed paw of the Commissary of the
      rural police.
    </p>
<p>
      The priest’s wife found herself an arm-chair in the dining-room, but she
      was not any more comfortable in it. Terrified in her arm-chair, she
      trembled like jelly. With pale lips she whispered to the parish-school
      girl she had won over to the cause:
    </p>
<p>
      “Irinushka, dearest, think of it—they are going to search us!”
     </p>
<p>
      The parish-school girl, Irinushka, looking slender, fresh, and red, like a
      newly washed carrot, moved her ears in her fright—a faculty which
      her companions envied her intensely—and whispered something to the
      priest’s wife.
    </p>
<p>
      The constable looked savagely at the priest’s wife and at the
      parish-school girl, and cried out in a shrill, somewhat hoarse voice,
      which resembled the crowing of a cock:
    </p>
<p>
      “I must very humbly ask you not to whisper.”
     </p>
<p>
      The constables with the guns pricked up their ears. Their sudden zeal made
      them perspire. The priest’s wife and the parish-school girl almost fainted
      from fright, but the girl at once recovered herself and began to get
      angry; she was now even more angry than she had been frightened a little
      while ago. Small tears gleamed in her eyes; small drops of perspiration
      appeared on her cheeks and on her forehead. The angry girl’s face grew
      even redder, so that now she resembled no longer a carrot but a wet
      beetroot. The only person in the room to be refreshingly and youthfully
      indignant, and all aflame with a deep anger, she looked truly beautiful in
      her ingenuous exasperation.
    </p>
<p>
      “Here is something new!” she cried. “Whispering is forbidden! Are you
      afraid that we will say something against you, that we will hurt you?”
     </p>
<p>
      At this moment all the Cadets and their wives and daughters, who were
      sitting around the table and against the walls, turned their horrified
      faces at the parish-school girl, and all together hissed at her. They
      would have laid hands on her, some one would have gagged her mouth—but
      not one of them dared to make a move. They sat motionless, looked at the
      parish-school girl with eyes dilated with fear, and hissed.
    </p>
<p>
      The parish-school girl, overcome with fright, grew silent. Only the
      hissing could be heard in the dining-room. Even the constables began to
      smile at the friendly hissing of the Cadets of both sexes.
    </p>
<p>
      When they had finished hissing, Irinushka said almost tranquilly:
    </p>
<p>
      “We didn’t whisper anything criminal. I only said about you, Mr.
      Constable, that you were fascinatingly handsome with your dark hair.”
     </p>
<p>
      When she saw that the Rameyev sisters were laughing, Irinushka turned to
      Elisaveta:
    </p>
<p>
      “You do agree with me, Vetochka, that the constable is a fascinatingly
      handsome man?”
     </p>
<p>
      The constable flushed. He was not sure whether the blushing girl was
      laughing at him or in earnest. In any case he frowned, vigorously twirled
      his dark moustache, and exclaimed:
    </p>
<p>
      “I must humbly ask you not to express yourself.”
     </p>
<p>
      Later, at home, Irinushka was scolded for her behaviour, regarded as
      untactful by Priest Zakrasin. The priest’s wife was especially angry. Poor
      Irinushka even cried several times.
    </p>
<p>
      But this was later. At this particular instant the Inspector of the police
      and the Colonel of the gendarmerie were sitting in Doctor Svetilovitch’s
      study and were examining the guests one by one; they turned their pockets
      inside out and, for some unknown reason, deprived their owners of letters,
      notes, and notebooks.
    </p>
<p>
      Rameyev was in a quiet, genial mood. He laughed on being searched.
      Trirodov made an effort to be calm and was a little sharper than he wished
      to be.
    </p>
<p>
      The women were searched in one of the bedrooms. A police-matron was
      brought for this purpose. She was a dirty, cunning sycophant. The contact
      of her coarse hands was repulsive. Elisaveta felt uncomfortably unclean
      after she had passed through the policewoman’s paws. Elena shivered with
      fear and nausea.
    </p>
<p>
      Those who had been searched were not permitted to enter the dining-room
      but were led into the drawing-room. Nearly all the searched ones were
      proud of this. They looked as if they were celebrating a birthday.
    </p>
<p>
      No one was arrested. They began to draw up the official report. Trirodov
      quietly addressed a gendarme, but the latter replied in a whisper:
    </p>
<p>
      “We are not permitted to enter into conversation with any one. Those
      scoundrelly spies are watching us, so that we shouldn’t speak with
      liberals. They are quick to inform against us.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You are in an unfortunate business,” said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      The Inspector of the police read the official report aloud. It was signed
      by Doctor Svetilovitch, the Inspector, and the witnesses.
    </p>
<p>
      When the uninvited guests left, the hosts and the invited guests sat down
      to supper.
    </p>
<p>
      It was presently discovered that the beer prepared for the occasion had
      been consumed. At the same time the cap of one of the guests had
      disappeared. Its owner was very much disturbed. The cap became almost the
      sole topic of conversation.
    </p>
<p>
      On the next day there was much talk in town about the search at the
      Svetilovitches, the consumed beer, and especially about the lost cap.
    </p>
<p>
      Not a little was said in the newspapers about the beer and the cap. One
      newspaper in St. Petersburg devoted a very heated article to the stolen
      cap. The author of the article made very broad generalizations. He asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Is it not one of those caps with which we were preparing to throw back
      the foreign enemy? Is not all Russia seeking now its lost cap and cannot
      be consoled?"<a href="#linknote-24" id="linknoteref-24" name="linknoteref-24"><small>24</small></a>
</p>
<p>
      Much less was said and written about the consumed beer. For some reason or
      other it did not offend people so much. In accordance with our general
      custom of placing substance above the form, it was found that the stealing
      of the cap deserved the greater protest, inasmuch as it is more difficult
      to get along without a cap than without beer.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0024" name="link2HCH0024"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXIV
    </h2>
<p>
      Once more alone! He sat in his room, musing of her, recalling her dear
      features.
    </p>
<p>
      There was an album before him—portrait after portrait of her—naked,
      beautiful, calling to love, to the sweet solace of love. Would this white
      breast cease heaving? Would these clear eyes grow dim?
    </p>
<p>
      She died.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov closed the album. For a long time he remained immersed in
      thought. Suddenly there was a rustling behind the wall, which gradually
      grew louder—it seemed as if the whole house were alive with the
      movements of the quiet children. Some one knocked on the door; Kirsha
      entered, distraught. He said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Father, let us go into the wood as fast as we can.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov looked at him in silence. Kirsha went on:
    </p>
<p>
      “Something terrible is happening. There, near the hollow, by the spring.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta’s blue eyes appeared to him suddenly as in a flame. Where was
      she? Was she in a difficulty? And his heart fell into the dark abyss of
      fear.
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha made haste. He almost cried in his agitation.
    </p>
<p>
      They went on horseback. They whipped up their horses. They feared they
      might be too late.
    </p>
<p>
      Again the quiet, dark, intensely pensive wood. Elisaveta walked alone—tranquil,
      blue-eyed, simple in her dress, harmonious in the graceful harmony of her
      deep experiences. She fell into thought—she recalled things and
      mused upon them. Her dreams were revealed in the gleam of her blue eyes.
      Dreams of happiness and of passionate love were interwoven with a
      different, greater love; and these melted into one another in the fiery
      longing for noble activity and sacrifice.
    </p>
<p>
      What did she not recall? What did she not dream of?
    </p>
<p>
      Sharp swords were being forged. To whose lot would they fall?
    </p>
<p>
      The high standard of solitary freedom was fluttering.
    </p>
<p>
      Youths and maidens!
    </p>
<p>
      There, in the dark halls of his house, proud plans were being made.
    </p>
<p>
      What a beautiful environment of naked beauty!
    </p>
<p>
      There were the children—happy and beautiful—in the wood.
    </p>
<p>
      There were the quiet children in his house—radiant and lovable and
      touched with such sadness.
    </p>
<p>
      There was the strange Kirsha.
    </p>
<p>
      Portraits of his first wife—naked and beautiful.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta’s blue eyes gleamed dreamily.
    </p>
<p>
      She recalled the details of the previous evening—the remote room in
      Trirodov’s house, the small gathering in it, the long discussions, the
      subsequent labours, the measured knock of the typing-machine, the damp
      pages put into portfolios.
    </p>
<p>
      Then she thought how she, Stchemilov, Voronok and some one else walked out
      into the various streets of the town to paste up the bills. They put the
      paste on while still walking. They always took a look round first to see
      that no one was in sight. Then they would pause and quickly stick the bill
      on the fence. They would go on farther.... The effort had been successful.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta did not think where she was going; she had walked quite far out
      of her way, to a place that she had not been to before. She imagined that
      the quiet children were keeping guard over her. She walked trustfully in
      the forest silence, yielding her bare feet to the caresses of the moist
      forest grasses, and now listened, now ceased listening, in delicious
      drowsiness.
    </p>
<p>
      Something rustled behind the bushes, some one’s nimble feet were running
      behind the light undergrowth.
    </p>
<p>
      Suddenly she heard a loud laugh—almost at her ears; it broke into
      her sweet reverie with such a violent suddenness—like the trumpet of
      an archangel calling to wake the dear dead on Judgment Day. Elisaveta felt
      some one’s hot breath on her neck. A rough, perspiring hand caught her by
      her bared forearm.
    </p>
<p>
      It was as if Elisaveta had suddenly awakened from a pleasant dream. She
      raised her frightened eyes and paused like one bewitched. Two vigorous
      ragged men stood before her. They were both handsome young fellows; one of
      them was astonishingly handsome, swarthy, black-eyed. Both were barely
      covered by their dirty rags, the openings in which showed their dirty,
      perspiring, powerful bodies.
    </p>
<p>
      The men were laughing and crying insolently:
    </p>
<p>
      “We’ve caught you this time, pretty one!”
     </p>
<p>
      “We’ll fondle you to your heart’s content—you shan’t forget us so
      soon!”
     </p>
<p>
      They drew closer and closer to her and blew their hot breath upon her.
      Elisaveta suddenly came to herself, tore herself away with a quick
      movement and began to run. A horror akin to wonder swung the resounding
      bell in her breast—her heavily beating heart. It hindered her
      running, and there was a beating of sharp little hammers under her knees.
    </p>
<p>
      The two men quickly overtook her, and as they obstructed her passage they
      laughed insolently and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Ah, my beauty! Don’t make a fuss!”
     </p>
<p>
      “You won’t get away anyway.”
     </p>
<p>
      They jostled one another as they pulled Elisaveta about, each towards
      himself; and acted altogether awkwardly, as if they did not know who
      should begin and how. Their sensual panting bared their white teeth,
      vigorous as those of a wild beast. The beauty of the half-naked, swarthy
      man tempted Elisaveta—it was a sudden piquant temptation acting like
      a poison.
    </p>
<p>
      The handsome man, his voice hoarse with agitation, shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “Tear her clothes! Let her dance naked before us, and make our eyes glad.”
     </p>
<p>
      “She hasn’t much on!” the other responded with a gay laugh.
    </p>
<p>
      He caught the broad collar of Elisaveta’s dress with one hand and jerked
      it forward; he thrust the other hand, large, hot, and perspiring, under
      her chemise and pressed and squeezed her taut young breast.
    </p>
<p>
      “Two men against one woman—aren’t you ashamed?” said Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t be ashamed, my lass, and lie down on the grass,” exclaimed the
      handsome, swarthy one, with a laugh very much like a horse’s neigh. His
      white teeth gleamed, his eyes flamed with desire, as he tore Elisaveta’s
      clothes with his hands and his teeth. The red and the white roses of her
      body were soon bared.
    </p>
<p>
      The sensual breathing of the assailants was horrible and repugnant to her,
      and she found it no less horrible and repugnant to look at their
      perspiring faces, at the gleaming of their enkindled eyes. But their
      beauty was tempting. In the dark depths of her consciousness a thought
      struggled—to yield herself, to yield willingly.
    </p>
<p>
      Her dress and chemise, flimsy of texture, ripped with a barely audible
      noise. Elisaveta struggled desperately, and shouted something—she
      did not remember what.
    </p>
<p>
      All her clothes were already torn, and soon the last shreds of her very
      light garments fell from her naked body. And in the struggle the rags of
      the two clumsily moving men ripped with a loud, splitting sound, their
      sudden nakedness rousing them even more.
    </p>
<p>
      There was seductiveness for Elisaveta in the nakedness of these impetuous
      bodies. She taunted them:
    </p>
<p>
      “The two of you can’t manage one girl.”
     </p>
<p>
      She was strong and agile. It was difficult for them to conquer her. Her
      naked body struggled and wriggled itself out of their arms. The blue arch
      of her teeth on the naked shoulder of the handsome, swarthy man grew red
      quickly. Drops of dark blood spurted on to his naked torso.
    </p>
<p>
      “Wait, you carrion-flesh,” he cried in a hoarse voice, “I will....”
     </p>
<p>
      The powerful but awkward pair grew more and more exasperated. They were
      enraged and intoxicated by her extraordinary resistance, by the falling
      away of their rags and their sudden nakedness. They beat Elisaveta, in the
      beginning with their fists, later with quickly severed branches, or with
      those which already lay on the ground. The sharp fires of pain stung her
      naked body and tempted her with a burning temptation to yield herself
      willingly. But she did not yield herself. Her loud sobs resounded for some
      distance around her.
    </p>
<p>
      The struggle continued for a long time. Elisaveta already began to weaken,
      and the raging passions of the two men had not yet exhausted themselves.
      Naked and savage, the lips of their wry mouths grown blue, their
      blood-inflamed eyes gleaming dimly, they were on the point of drawing her
      down to the ground.
    </p>
<p>
      Suddenly the white, quiet boys came running in a swarm into the glade,
      lightly and noiselessly, like a rapid, light summer shower. They appeared
      so quickly from among the bushes and threw themselves on the savage pair;
      they surrounded them, cast themselves upon them, threw them down, cast a
      sleeping spell upon them, and dragged them away into the depth of the dark
      hollow. And they left the naked bodies sprawling helplessly on the rough
      grasses.
    </p>
<p>
      The rapid, noiseless movements of the quiet boys put Elisaveta into a mood
      verging on oblivion, half painful and half sweet.
    </p>
<p>
      What happened in that thicket seemed like a heavy and incredible dream to
      Elisaveta—a sudden and cruel whim of the undependable Aisa. And for
      a long time a dark horror nestled in her soul, merging with senseless
      laughter—the exulting smile of pitiless irony....
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta came to herself. She saw above her the green branches of the
      birches and the lovely pale faces. She lay in the refreshing grass
      encircled by quiet children. She could not recall at once what had
      happened to her. Her nakedness was incomprehensible to her—but she
      felt no shame.
    </p>
<p>
      Her eyes paused for a moment on some one’s neatly combed fair hair. She
      recognized Klavdia, the dissembling instructress. She stood under the
      tree, her arms folded, and looked with her grey eyes gleaming with envy at
      Elisaveta’s naked body; it was as if a grey spider was spinning across her
      soul a grey web of dull oblivion and tedious indifference.
    </p>
<p>
      “Clothes will be here in a moment,” said one of the boys quietly.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta closed her eyes and lay tranquilly. Her head felt somewhat
      dizzy. Fatigue overcame her. Beautiful and graceful she lay there—as
      perfect as the dream of Don Quixote....
    </p>
<p>
      They were dark, long-drawn-out moments, and there fell in their midst from
      the gradually darkening sky a brief interval of great comprehension. And
      this brief interval became like an age—from birth until death. Early
      next morning Elisaveta clearly recalled the course of this strange, vivid
      life—the sad lofty road, the life of Queen Ortruda.<a href="#linknote-25" id="linknoteref-25" name="linknoteref-25"><small>25</small></a>
</p>
<p>
      And when, suffocating, Ortruda was dying....
    </p>
<p>
      The rush of light feet in the grass awakened Elisaveta. Light, adroit
      hands dressed her. The quiet boys helped her to rise. Elisaveta rose and
      looked around her: a light green Grecian tunic draped her tired body
      within its broad folds. Elisaveta thought:
    </p>
<p>
      “How shall I manage to walk so far?”
     </p>
<p>
      And as if in answer to her question, she suddenly caught sight of a light
      trap under the trees. Some one said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Kirsha will drive you home.”
     </p>
<p>
      In her strange dress Elisaveta returned home. She sat silently in the
      trap. She did not even notice Trirodov. She was trying to recall
      something. Through the dark horror and senseless laughter there shone
      clearer and clearer the recollection of another life lived through
      momentarily—the life of Queen Ortruda.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0025" name="link2HCH0025"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXV
    </h2>
<p>
      The quiet boy Grisha stood within the enclosure of enchanted sadness and
      mystery. His face was pale and reposeful, and there was a keen, quiet
      sparkle in his cool, sky-blue eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      The early evening sky was growing bluer—a blue reposefulness was
      pouring itself out upon the earth and extinguishing the ruby-coloured
      flames of the sunset. And silhouetted against the blueness of the heights
      birds were flying about. Why should they have wings, these earthly,
      preoccupied creatures?
    </p>
<p>
      As he stood there in the quiet of the enclosure, Grisha felt himself drawn
      by the fragrance of the lilies of the valley, no less innocent than he,
      the quiet, blue-eyed Grisha. It was as if some one were calling him
      outside the enclosure, towards the poor life which tormented itself in the
      blue and mist-enveloped distance, calling him despairingly and agonizingly—and
      he both wished and did not wish to go. Some one’s voice, full of distress,
      called him wearily to life outside.
    </p>
<p>
      How can calls of distress be resisted? When will the tranquil heart forget
      earthly travail wholly and for always?
    </p>
<p>
      At last Grisha walked out of the gate. He took a deep breath of the sharp
      but delicious outside air. He walked quietly upon the narrow, dusty path.
      His light footprints lay behind him, and his white clothes glimmered
      brightly, in quiet movement, against the dim verdure and the grey dust.
      Before him, barely visible, rose the white, lifeless, clear moon,
      powerless to enchant the tedious earthly spaces.
    </p>
<p>
      Then the town began—the grey, dull, tiresome town, with its dirty
      back yards, consumptive vegetable gardens, broken-down hedges, bathhouses,
      and sheds, and all manner of ugly projections and depressing amorphousness—all
      of it resembling a hopeless ruin.
    </p>
<p>
      Egorka, the eleven-year-old son of a local commoner, stood by the hedge of
      one of the vegetable gardens. What had been red calico once made up his
      torn shirt; but his face!—it was like that of an angel in a tawny
      mask covered with spots of dirt and dust. Wings are for light feet, but
      what can the earth do? Only dust and clay cling to light feet.
    </p>
<p>
      Egorka had come out to play. He waited for his companions, but for some
      reason none of them was to be seen. He stood alone there, now listening to
      this, now looking at that. He suddenly espied on the other side of the
      hedge an unknown quiet boy, who—all in white—was looking at
      him. Egorka asked in astonishment:
    </p>
<p>
      “Where do you come from?”
     </p>
<p>
      “You can never know,” said Grisha.
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t be too sure of that!” shouted Egorka gaily. “Maybe I do know. Now
      tell me.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Would you like to know?” asked Grisha with a smile.
    </p>
<p>
      It was a tranquil smile. Egorka was about to stick his tongue out in
      response, but changed his mind for some reason. They began to converse, to
      exchange whispers.
    </p>
<p>
      Everything around them lapsed into deep quiet, and nothing appeared to
      give heed to them—it was as if the two little ones went off into
      quite another world, behind a thin curtain which no one could rend. So
      motionless stood the birches bewitched mysteriously by three fallen
      spirits. Grisha asked again:
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, you would like to know?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Honest to God, I’d like to; here’s a cross to prove it,” said Egorka
      rather quickly, and he crossed himself with an oblique movement of the
      joined fingers of his dirty hand.
    </p>
<p>
      “Then follow me,” said Grisha.
    </p>
<p>
      He turned lightly homewards, and as he walked he did not stop to look
      round at the meagre, tiresome objects of this grey life. Egorka followed
      the white boy. He walked quietly and marvelled at the other. He thought
      for a while, then he asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Are you not one of God’s angels? Why are you so white?”
     </p>
<p>
      The quiet boy smiled at these words. He said with a light sigh:
    </p>
<p>
      “No, I am a human being.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You don’t mean it? An ordinary boy?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Just like you—almost like you.”
     </p>
<p>
      “How clean you are! I should say you washed yourself seven times a day
      with egg-soap! You walk about barefoot, not at all like me, and the
      sunburn doesn’t seem to stick to you—there’s only a cover of dust on
      your feet.”
     </p>
<p>
      The aroma of violets came from somewhere, and it mingled now with the dry
      smell of the flying dust, now with the sickly, half-sweet, half-bitter
      odour of the smoke of a forest fire.
    </p>
<p>
      The two boys avoided the tiresome monotony of the fields and the roads,
      and entered the dark silence of the wood. They passed by glades and copses
      and quietly purling streams. The boys strode along narrow footpaths, where
      the gentle dew clung to their feet. Everything appeared wonderful in
      Egorka’s eyes, used only to the raging turbulence of a malignant yet dull
      and grey life. The time lingered on, running and consuming itself,
      wreathed in a circle of delicious moments, and it seemed to Egorka that he
      had come into some fabulous land. He slept somewhere at night, and he felt
      intensely happy on opening his eyes next morning, having been awakened by
      the twitter of birds which shook the dew from the pliant tree-limbs; then
      he played with the cheerful boys and listened to music.
    </p>
<p>
      Sometimes the white Grisha left Egorka all by himself. Then he again
      reappeared. Egorka noticed that Grisha kept apart from the others, the
      cheerful, noisy children; that he did not play with them, and that he
      spoke little—not that he was afraid, or deliberately turned aside,
      but simply because it seemed to arrange itself, and it was natural for him
      to be alone, radiant and sad.
    </p>
<p>
      Once Egorka and Grisha, on being left by themselves, went strolling
      together through a little wood which was all permeated with light. The
      wood grew denser and denser.
    </p>
<p>
      They came to two tall, straight trees. A bronze rod was suspended between
      them, and upon the rod, on rings, hung a dark red silk curtain. The light
      breeze caused the thin draperies to flutter. The quiet, blue-eyed Grisha
      drew the curtain aside. The red folds came together with a sharp rustle
      and with a sudden flare as of a flame. The opening revealed a wooded
      vista, all permeated with a strangely bright light, like a vision of a
      transfigured land. Grisha said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Go, Egorushka—it is good there.”
     </p>
<p>
      Egorka looked into the clear wooded distance: fear beset his heart, and he
      said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “I am afraid.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What are you afraid of, silly boy?” asked Grisha affectionately.
    </p>
<p>
      “I don’t know. Something makes me afraid,” said Egorka timidly.
    </p>
<p>
      Grisha felt aggrieved. He sighed quietly and then said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, go home, then, if you are afraid here.”
     </p>
<p>
      Egorka recalled his home, his mother, the town he lived in. He did not
      have a very happy time of it at home—they lived poorly, and he was
      whipped often. Egorka suddenly threw himself at the quiet Grisha, caught
      him by his gentle, cool hands, and cried:
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t chase me away, dear Grisha, don’t chase me from you.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Am I chasing you away?” retorted Grisha. “You yourself don’t want to
      come.”
     </p>
<p>
      Egorka got down on his knees and whispered as he kissed Grisha’s feet:
    </p>
<p>
      “I pray to you angels with all my strength.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Then follow me,” said Grisha.
    </p>
<p>
      Light hands descended on Egorka’s shoulders and lifted him from the grass.
      Egorka followed Grisha obediently to the blue paradise of his quiet eyes.
      A peaceful valley opened before him and the quiet children played in it.
      The dew fell on Egorka’s feet, and its kisses gave him joy. The quiet
      children surrounded Egorka and Grisha and, all joining hands in one broad
      ring, carried the two boys with them in a swiftly moving dance.
    </p>
<p>
      “My dear angels,” shouted Egorka, twirling and rejoicing, “you have bright
      little faces, you have clean little eyes, you have white little hands, you
      have light little feet! Am I on earth or am I in Paradise? My dear ones,
      my little brothers and little sisters, where are your little wings?”
     </p>
<p>
      Some one’s near, sweet-sounding voice answered him:
    </p>
<p>
      “You are upon the earth, not in Paradise, and we have no need of wings—we
      fly wingless.”
     </p>
<p>
      They captivated, bewitched, and caressed him. They showed him all the
      wonders of the wood under the tree-stumps, the bushes, the dry leaves—little
      wood-sprites with rustling little voices, with spider-webby hair, straight
      ones and hunchbacked ones; little old men of the wood; the shadow-sprites
      and little companion spirits; bantering little sprites in green coats,
      midnight ones and daylight ones, grey ones and black ones; little
      jokers-pokers with shaggy little paws; fabulous birds and animals—everything
      that is not to be seen in the gloomy, everyday, earthly world.
    </p>
<p>
      Egorka had a splendid time with the quiet children. He did not notice how
      a whole week had passed by—from Friday to Friday. And suddenly he
      began to long for his mother. He heard her calling him at night, and as he
      woke in agitation he called:
    </p>
<p>
      “Mamma, where are you?”
     </p>
<p>
      There was stillness and silence all around him—it was an altogether
      unknown world. Egorka began to cry. The quiet children came to comfort
      him. They said to him:
    </p>
<p>
      “There’s nothing to cry about. You will return to your mother. And she
      will be glad, and she will caress you.”
     </p>
<p>
      “She may whip me,” said Egorka, sobbing.
    </p>
<p>
      The quiet children smiled and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Fathers and mothers whip their children.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They like to do it.”
     </p>
<p>
      “It seems wicked to beat any one.”
     </p>
<p>
      “But they really mean well.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They beat whom they love.”
     </p>
<p>
      “People mix everything up shame, love, pain.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Don’t you be afraid, Egorushka—she’s a mother.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Very well, I’ll not be afraid,” said Egorka, comforted.
    </p>
<p>
      When Egorka took leave of the quiet children Grisha said to him:
    </p>
<p>
      “You had better not tell your mother where you have passed all this time.”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, I won’t tell,” replied Egorka vigorously, “not for anything.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You’ll blab it out,” said one of the girls.
    </p>
<p>
      She had dark, infinitely deep eyes; her thin, bare arms were always folded
      obstinately across her breast. She spoke even less than the other quiet
      children, and of all human words she liked “no” most.
    </p>
<p>
      “No, I shan’t blab anything,” asserted Egorka. “I shan’t even tell any one
      where I have been; I shall put all these words under lock and key.”
     </p>
<p>
      That same evening when Egorka left with Grisha, his mother suddenly missed
      him. She shouted a long time and cursed and threatened; but as there was
      no response she became frightened. “Perhaps he’s been drowned,” she
      thought. She ran among her neighbours, wailing and lamenting.
    </p>
<p>
      “My boy’s gone. I can’t find him anywhere. I simply don’t know where else
      to look. He’s either drowned in the river or fallen into a well—that’s
      what comes of mischief-making.”
     </p>
<p>
      One neighbour suggested:
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s most likely the Jews have caught him and are keeping him in some
      out-of-the-way spot, and only waiting to let his Christian blood and then
      drink it.”
     </p>
<p>
      This guess pleased them. They said with great assurance:
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s Jews’ work.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They are again at it, that accursed breed.”
     </p>
<p>
      “There’s no getting rid of them.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What a wretched affair!”
     </p>
<p>
      They all believed this. The disturbing rumour that the Jews had stolen a
      Christian boy spread about town. Ostrov took a most zealous share in
      disseminating the rumour. The markets were filled with noisy discussions.
      The tradesmen and dealers, instigated by Ostrov, bellowed loudly their
      denunciations. Why did Ostrov do this? He knew, of course, that it was a
      lie. But latterly, acting on the instructions of the local branch of the
      Black Hundred, he had been engaged in provocatory work. The new episode
      came in handily.
    </p>
<p>
      The police began an investigation. They looked for the boy, but without
      success. In any case, they found a Jew who had been seen by some one near
      Egorka’s house. He was arrested.
    </p>
<p>
      It was evening again. Egorka’s mother was at home when Egorka returned.
      There was a radiant sadness about him as he walked up to his mother,
      kissed her and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Hello, mamma!”
     </p>
<p>
      Egorka’s mother assailed him with questions:
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh, you little wretch! Where have you been? What have you been doing?
      What unclean demons have carried you away?”
     </p>
<p>
      Egorka remembered his promise. He stood before his mother in obstinate
      silence. His mother questioned him angrily:
    </p>
<p>
      “Where have you been? tell me! Did the Jews try to crucify you?”
     </p>
<p>
      “What Jews?” exclaimed Egorka. “No one has tried to crucify me.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You just wait, you young brat,” shouted his mother in a rage, “I’ll make
      you talk.”
     </p>
<p>
      She caught hold of the besom and began to tear off its twigs. Then she
      stripped the boy of his light clothes. Still wrapt in his radiant sadness,
      Egorka looked at his mother with astonished eyes. He cried plaintively:
    </p>
<p>
      “Mamma, what are you doing?”
     </p>
<p>
      But, already seized by the rough hand, the little body that had been
      washed by the still waters began to struggle on the knees of the harshly
      crying woman. It was painful, and Egorka sobbed in a shrill voice. His
      mother beat him long and painfully, and she accompanied each blow with an
      admonition:
    </p>
<p>
      “Tell me where you’ve been! Tell me! I won’t stop until you tell me.”
     </p>
<p>
      At last she stopped and burst out into violent crying:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why has God punished me so? But no, I’ll yet beat a word out of you. I’ll
      give it to you worse to-morrow.”
     </p>
<p>
      Egorka was shaken less by the physical pain than by the unexpected
      harshness of his reception. He had been in touch with another world, and
      the quiet children in the enchanted valley had reconstructed his soul on
      another plane.
    </p>
<p>
      His mother, however, loved him. Of course, she loved him. That was why she
      beat him in her anger. Love and cruelty go always together among
      humankind. They like to torment, vengeance gives them pleasure. But later
      Egorka’s mother took pity on him; she thought she had flogged him too
      hard. And now she walked up quietly to him.
    </p>
<p>
      Egorka lay on the bench and moaned softly, then he grew silent. His mother
      smoothed his back awkwardly with her rough hands and left him. She thought
      he had gone to sleep.
    </p>
<p>
      In the morning she went to wake him. She found him lying cold and
      motionless on the bench, his face downward. And his radiance was gone from
      him—he lay there a dark, cold corpse. The horrified mother began to
      wail:
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s dead! Egorushka, are you really dead? Oh, God—and his little
      hands are quite cold!”
     </p>
<p>
      She dashed out to her neighbours, she aroused the whole neighbourhood with
      her shrill cries. Inquisitive women soon filled the house.
    </p>
<p>
      “I struck him ever so lightly with a thin twig,” the mother wailed. “Then
      my angel lay down on the bench, cried a little, then grew quiet and went
      to sleep, and in the morning he gave up his soul to God.”
     </p>
<p>
      Held by a heavy, death-like sleep, Egorka lay there motionless and to all
      appearances lifeless, and listened to his mother’s wailing and to the
      discordant clamour of voices. And he heard his mother keening over him:
    </p>
<p>
      “Those accursed Jews have sucked out all his blood! It was not the first
      time that I beat my little darling! It used to be that I’d beat him and
      put a bit of salt on afterwards, and nothing would come of it—and
      here I’ve hit him with a little twig and he, my handsome darling, my
      little angel....”
     </p>
<p>
      Egorka heard her groans and wondered at his fettered helplessness and
      immobility. He seemed to hear the noise of some one else’s body—he
      realized that it was his own as it was put on the floor to be washed. He
      had an intense longing to stir, to rise, but he could not. He thought:
    </p>
<p>
      “I have died: what are they going to do with me now?”
     </p>
<p>
      And again he thought:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why is it that my soul is not leaving my body? I do not feel that I have
      arms or legs, yet I can hear.”
     </p>
<p>
      He wondered and waited. Then, with a sudden powerless exertion, he tried
      to wake from his death-like sleep, to return to himself, to run away from
      the dark grave—and again his helpless will drooped, and again he
      waited.
    </p>
<p>
      And he heard the sounds of the funeral chant, and noted the blueness of
      the little cloud of incense-smoke and the fragrance that was wafted by the
      quietly sounding swings of the smoky censer.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0026" name="link2HCH0026"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXVI
    </h2>
<p>
      Egorka was buried. His mother wept long over his grave in long-drawn-out
      wails, then went home. She was convinced that her boy would be far better
      off there than upon the earth, and was consoled. But such truly Russian
      people as Kerbakh, Ostrov, and others would not be consoled. They let
      loose evil rumours. The report spread:
    </p>
<p>
      “The Jews have tortured a Christian boy. They’ve cut him up with knives
      and used his blood in their matzoth."<a href="#linknote-26" id="linknoteref-26" name="linknoteref-26"><small>26</small></a>
</p>
<p>
      The slanderers were not deterred by the consideration that the Jewish
      Passover had taken place very much earlier than the running away of Egorka
      from his mother.
    </p>
<p>
      The townsmen were agitated—those who believed as well as those who
      did not believe the tale. Demands were made for an investigation and the
      opening of the grave.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta came to Trirodov’s house early in the day and remained there
      long. Trirodov showed her his colony. The quiet boy Grisha accompanied
      them, and looked with the blue reposefulness of his impassionate eyes into
      the blue flames of her rapturous ones, soothing the sultriness and passion
      of her agitation.
    </p>
<p>
      Her light, ample dress seemed transparent—the perfect outlines of
      her body showed clearly; the red and white roses of her breast and
      shoulders were visible. Her sunburnt feet were bare—she loved the
      affectionate contact of the earth and the grass.
    </p>
<p>
      It was all like a paradise—the twittering of the birds, the hubbub
      of the children, the rustle of the wind in the grass and in the trees, the
      murmur of the brook in the wood. Everything was innocent, as in Paradise—girls,
      scantily dressed, came up, spoke to them, and were not ashamed. Everything
      was chaste, as in Paradise. And cloudless, the sky shone above the forest
      glades.
    </p>
<p>
      Towards evening Elisaveta sat at Trirodov’s. They read poems. Elisaveta
      loved poems even before she met Trirodov. Who else should love them if not
      girls? Now she read poems avidly. Whole hours passed by quickly in
      reading, and the poems gave birth in her to sweet and bitter emotions and
      passionate dreams.
    </p>
<p>
      Perhaps this was so because she was in love; in love she had found a new
      sun for herself, and she led a new dance round it of dreams, hopes,
      sorrows, joys, enchantments, and raptures. And, flaunting a rainbow of
      radiance, this round dance, this naming circle of impetuous emotions, was
      full of a rich music and vivid colour.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov caused her to fall in love with the verses of the new poets. She
      found such enchantments and such disillusions in the fragile music of new
      poetry, written so happily and so elusively, with a lightness and
      transparency like those of the dresses that she now loved to wear.
    </p>
<p>
      With the harmony of their souls thus achieved, why should they not love
      one another?
    </p>
<p>
      Once, after they had read together some beautiful love-poems, Trirodov
      remarked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Love says ‘No’ to the world, the lyrical ‘No’—marriage says ‘Yes’ 
      to it, the ironic ‘Yes.’ To be in love, to strive, yet not to possess—that
      is the poetry of love, sweet but illusive. Externally love contradicts the
      world and conceals its fatal discord. To be together, to say ‘Yes’ to some
      one, to yield oneself—that is the way in which life reveals its
      irreconcilable contradictions. And how to be together when we are such
      solitary souls? And how to yield oneself? Mask after mask falls off, and
      it is terrible to see Janus-faced actuality. A weariness comes on—what
      has become of love, that love which had prided itself on being stronger
      than death?”
     </p>
<p>
      “You have had a wife,” said Elisaveta. “You loved her. Everything here is
      reminiscent of her. She was beautiful.”
     </p>
<p>
      Her voice became dark, and the blue flashes under the moist eyelids lit up
      with a jealous flame. Trirodov smiled and said sadly:
    </p>
<p>
      “She left life before the time had come for weariness to make its
      appearance. My Dulcinea did not want to become Aldonza.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Dulcinea is loved,” said Elisaveta, “but the fullness of life belongs to
      Aldonza becoming Dulcinea.”
     </p>
<p>
      “But does Aldonza want that?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “She wants it, but cannot realize it,” said Elisaveta. “But we will help
      her, we will teach her.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov smiled affectionately—if sadly—and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “But he, like the eternal Don Juan, always seeks Dulcinea. And what is to
      him the poor earthly Aldonza, poisoned by the dream of beauty?”
     </p>
<p>
      “It is for that that he will love her,” replied Elisaveta; “because she is
      poor and has been poisoned by the exultant dream of beauty. The basis for
      their union will be creative beauty.”
     </p>
<p>
      The night came: a darkness settled outside the windows, full of the
      whisperings of sad, pellucid voices. Trirodov walked up to the window.
      Elisaveta soon stood beside him—and almost at the same instant their
      eyes fixed themselves upon the distant, dimly visible cemetery. Trirodov
      said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “He has been buried there. But he will rise from his grave.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta looked at him in astonishment and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Who?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov glanced at her like one suddenly awakened and said slowly:
    </p>
<p>
      “It is a boy who has not yet lived, and who is still chaste. His body
      contains all possibilities and not a single achievement. He is like one
      created to receive every energy directed at him. Now he is asleep in his
      tight coffin, in a grave. He will awake for a life free from passions and
      desires, for clear seeing and hearing, for the establishment of one will.”
     </p>
<p>
      “When will he awake?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “When I wish it,” said Trirodov, “I will wake him.”
     </p>
<p>
      The sound of his voice was sad and insistent—like the sound of an
      invocation.
    </p>
<p>
      “To-night?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “If you wish it,” answered Trirodov quietly.
    </p>
<p>
      “Must I leave?” she asked again.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” he answered, just as simply and as quietly as before.
    </p>
<p>
      She bid him good-bye and left. Trirodov again walked up to the window. He
      called some one in a voice of invocation and whispered:
    </p>
<p>
      “You will awake, dear one. Wake, rise, come to me. I will open your eyes,
      and you will see what you have not yet seen. I will open your ears, and
      you will hear what you have not yet heard. You are of the earth—I
      will not part you from the earth. You are from me, you are mine, you are
      I; come to me. Wake!”
     </p>
<p>
      He waited confidently. He knew that when the sleeper had awakened in his
      grave they would come to him—the wise, innocent ones—and would
      tell him.
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha walked into the room quietly. He walked up to his father and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Are you looking at the cemetery?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov laid his hand silently on the boy’s head. Kirsha said:
    </p>
<p>
      “There is a boy in one of the graves who is not dead.”
     </p>
<p>
      “How do you know?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      But he knew what Kirsha’s answer would be. Kirsha said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Grisha told me that Egorka was not quite dead. He is asleep; but he will
      awake!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “And will he come to you?” asked Kirsha.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” was the answer.
    </p>
<p>
      “When will he come?” asked Kirsha again.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov said with a smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “Rouse Grisha and ask him whether the sleeper has yet begun to wake in his
      grave.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha walked away. Trirodov looked in silence at the distant cemetery,
      where the dark, bereaved night stooped sadly over the crosses.
    </p>
<p>
      “And where are you, my happy beloved?”
     </p>
<p>
      A quiet rustle made itself audible behind the doors: the little
      house-sprites moved quietly near the walls, and whispered and waited.
    </p>
<p>
      Awakened by a low sigh, Grisha arose. He walked out into the garden and
      stood listening with downcast eyes near the railing. He was smiling, but
      without joy. Who knew whether the other would rejoice?
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha walked up to him and, indicating the cemetery with a movement of
      his head, asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Is he alive? Has he awakened?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said Grisha. “Egorushka is sighing in his grave; he’s just
      awakened.”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha ran home to his father and repeated to him Grisha’s words.
    </p>
<p>
      “We must make haste,” said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      He again experienced an agitation with which he had been long familiar. He
      felt in himself an ebb and flow as of some strange power. A kind of
      marvellous energy, gathered by some means known to himself alone, issued
      slowly from him. A mysterious current passed between himself and the grave
      where the boy who had departed from life lay in the throes of death-sleep;
      it cast a spell upon the sleeper and caused him to stir.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov quickly descended the stairway into the room where the quiet
      children slept. His light footsteps were barely audible, and his feet felt
      the cold that came from the planked floor. The quiet children lay upon
      their beds motionlessly, as if they did not breathe. It seemed as if there
      were many of them, and that they slept eternally in the endless darkness
      of that quiet bedchamber.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov paused seven times, and each time one of the sleepers awoke at
      his one glance. Three boys and four girls answered his call. They stood
      there tranquilly, looked at Trirodov and waited.
    </p>
<p>
      “Follow me!” said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      They walked after him, the white quiet ones, and the rustle of their light
      footsteps was barely heard.
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha waited in the garden—and he seemed earthly and dark among the
      white, quiet children.
    </p>
<p>
      They walked quickly upon the Navii path like gliding, nocturnal shadows,
      one after another, the whole ten of them, with Grisha leading. The dew
      fell upon their naked feet, and the ground under their feet was soft,
      warm, and sad.
    </p>
<p>
      Egorka awoke in his grave. It was dark and somewhat stuffy. His head felt
      oppressed as under a weight. There sounded in his ears the persistent
      call:
    </p>
<p>
      “Rise, come to me.”
     </p>
<p>
      Fear assailed him. His eyes looked but did not see. It was hard to
      breathe. He recalled something, and all that he recalled was like a
      horrible delirium. Then came the sudden awful realization:
    </p>
<p>
      “I am in a grave, in a coffin.”
     </p>
<p>
      He groaned, and his heart began to thump. His throat, as if clutched by
      some one’s fingers, shivered convulsively. His eyes dilated widely, and
      the flaming darkness of the nailed-up coffin swept before them. As he
      tossed about in the tight coffin, tormented by his dread, Egorka moaned,
      and whispered in a dull voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Three house-sprites, three wood-sprites, three fallen sprites!”
     </p>
<p>
      The gate to the burial-ground was open. Trirodov and the children entered.
      They were among the poor graves—simple little mounds and wooden
      crosses. It was gloomy, damp, and quiet. There was a smell of grass—a
      graveyard reverie. The crosses gleamed white in the mist. A poignant
      silence hovered there, and the whole cemetery seemed filled with the dark
      reverie of the dead. Poignant feelings were re-experienced deliciously and
      painfully.
    </p>
<p>
      Nowhere does the soil feel so near to one as in a graveyard—it is
      the sacred soil of repose. They walked quietly, the whole ten of them, one
      after another, and felt the coolness and the softness of the ground under
      their bare feet. They passed near a grave. The little mound was quiet and
      poor, and it seemed as if the earth were crying, wailing, and suffering.
    </p>
<p>
      The boys, dimly discernible in the darkness against the lumps of black
      earth, began to dig the grave. The little girls stood very quietly, one at
      each of the four sides, and seemed engrossed in the nocturnal silence. The
      watchmen slept like the dead, and the dead slept, keeping a powerless
      watch over their graves.
    </p>
<p>
      Slowly the little coffin began to show. The low moan became audible. The
      boys already jumped into the grave. They bent over the poor little coffin.
      Though it was half-covered with earth, the boys already felt the tremors
      of its cover under their feet.
    </p>
<p>
      The cover, hammered down with nails, yielded easily to the exertions of
      the small, childish hands, and fell to the side against the grave’s
      earthen wall. The coffin opened as simply as the door of a room opens.
    </p>
<p>
      Egorka was already losing his consciousness. When the boys first looked at
      him he was lying on his side. He stirred faintly.
    </p>
<p>
      He breathed in the air as if with short, broken sighs. He shivered. He
      turned over on his back.
    </p>
<p>
      The fresh air blew into his face like a young rapture of deliverance.
      There was a sudden instant of joy—and it went out like a flame. Why
      indeed, should he rejoice? The tranquil, unjoyous ones bent over him.
    </p>
<p>
      Again to live? His soul felt strange, quiet, indifferent. Some one said
      affectionately over him:
    </p>
<p>
      “Rise, dear one, come to us; we will show you that which you have not seen
      and will teach you that which is secret.”
     </p>
<p>
      The stars of the far sky looked into his eyes, and some one’s near,
      affectionate eyes bent over him. Many, many gentle, cool hands stretched
      out to him; they took him, helped him up and lifted him out.
    </p>
<p>
      He stood in a circle. They looked at him. His arms again folded themselves
      across his breast, as in the grave—as, if the habit had been
      assimilated for ages. One of the little girls rearranged them and
      straightened them out.
    </p>
<p>
      Suddenly Egorka asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “What is this? A little grave?”
     </p>
<p>
      Grisha replied:
    </p>
<p>
      “This is your grave, but you will be with us and with our master.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And the grave?” asked Egorka.
    </p>
<p>
      “We will fill it up again,” replied Grisha.
    </p>
<p>
      The boys began to fill up the grave. Egorka looked on in quiet
      astonishment as lumps of earth fell into the grave and the little mound
      kept on growing. The ground was smoothed down and the cross placed as
      before. Egorka walked up to it and read the inscription:
    </p>
<p>
      “Boy Giorgiy Antipov.”
     </p>
<p>
      Then the year, month, and date of his death.
    </p>
<p>
      He was faintly astonished, but an ominous indifference already made
      captive his soul.
    </p>
<p>
      Some one touched his shoulder and asked something. Egorka was silent. He
      looked as if he did not understand.
    </p>
<p>
      “Come to me,” said Trirodov quietly to him.
    </p>
<p>
      The little girl who always said “No” took Egorka by the hand and led him
      away. They went back by the same road as they came. The darkness closed
      after them.
    </p>
<p>
      Egorka remained with the quiet children. He had no passport, and his life
      was different.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0027" name="link2HCH0027"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXVII
    </h2>
<p>
      Trirodov returned home. Like one returned from a grave, he felt happy and
      light-hearted. His heart was consumed with exultation and resolution. He
      recalled the talk he had had that day with Elisaveta. There rose before
      him the proud joyous vision of life transfigured by the force of creative
      art, of life created by the proud will.
    </p>
<p>
      If love, or what seemed like love, came to him, why should he resist it?
      Whether it was a true emotion, or an illusion, was it not all the same?
      The will, exulting above the world, would determine everything as it
      wanted. It would have the power to erect a beautiful love over the
      helplessness of the exhausted senses.
    </p>
<p>
      That which has so long weighed in the scales of consciousness, that which
      has so long and so desperately wrestled in the dark region of the
      unconscious now stood at a clear decision. Let the word “Yes” he said.
      Once more Yes. For a new grief? For a glorious triumph? It was all the
      same. If only he believed in her—and she in him. So much did one
      mean to the other now.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov sat down at the table. He smiled, and for a few moments seemed
      lost in thought. Then he wrote quickly upon a light blue sheet of paper:
    </p>
<p>
      “Elisaveta, I want your love. Love me, dear one, love me. I forget my
      knowledge, I reject my doubts, I become again as simple and as humble as a
      communicant of a radiant kingdom, like my dear children—and I only
      want your nearness and your kisses. Upon the earth, dear to our heart, I
      will pass by, in simple and joyous humility, with bare feet, like you—in
      order that I may come to you as you come to me. Love me.
    </p>
<p>
      “Your GIORGIY.”
     </p>
<p>
      There was a slight rustle behind the door. It seemed as if the whole house
      were filled with the quiet children.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov sealed the letter. He wished to take it at once and leave it on
      the sill of her open window. He walked quietly, immersed in the wood’s
      darkness—and his feet felt the contact of warm moss, the dew-wet
      grass, and the simple, rough, beloved earth. A refreshing breeze blew from
      the river in the night coolness, but now and then there came a sickly,
      pungent gust of the forest fire.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
      Elisaveta could not fall asleep. She rose from her bed. She stood by the
      window, and yielded her naked body to the transparent embraces of the
      nocturnal breeze. She thought of something, mused of something. And all
      her thoughts and musings joined in one dancing circle around Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      Should she wait? He was a weary, sad man, and he would not say the sweet
      words for fear of appearing ridiculous, and of receiving a cold answer.
    </p>
<p>
      “Why should I wait?” she thought. “Or don’t I dare decide my fate like a
      queen, to call him to me, and to demand his love? Why should I remain
      silent?”
     </p>
<p>
      And she decided:
    </p>
<p>
      “I will tell him myself—I love you, I love you, come to me, love
      me.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta whispered the delicious words, entrusting her passionate
      reveries to the nocturnal silence. The dark eyes of the nocturnal guest
      who brought tempting reveries were aflame. The quiet splashing laughter of
      the water-nymph behind the reeds under the moon mingled with the quiet,
      delicious laughter of the nocturnal enchantress who had flaming eyes,
      burning lips, and a naked body formed from the coils of white flame. Her
      flaming body was like Elisaveta’s body, and the black lightnings of the
      invisible sorceress were like the blue lightnings of Elisaveta’s eyes. She
      tempted Elisaveta, and called to her:
    </p>
<p>
      “Go to him, go. Fall naked at his feet, kiss his feet, laugh for him,
      dance for him, tire yourself out for his sake, be a slave to him, be a
      thing in his hands—cling to him, and kiss him, and look into his
      eyes, and yield yourself up to him. Go, go, hurry, run, he is approaching
      even now—do you see him? It is he who has just come out of the wood—do
      you see? It is his feet that show white in the grass. Fling the door wide
      open and run as you are to meet him.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta saw Trirodov coming. Her heart began to beat with such pain and
      such delight. She walked away from the window. She waited. She heard his
      footsteps on the sand under the window. Something flashed through the
      window and fell on the floor. The footsteps retreated.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta picked up the letter, lit a candle, and read the beloved blue
      sheet of paper. The nocturnal enchantress whispered to her:
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s going away. Hurry. You will know how sweet are the first kisses of
      love. Go to him, run after him, don’t look for tiresome robes.”
     </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta impetuously flung the door open on the veranda, and ran down the
      broad steps into the garden. She ran after Trirodov and shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “Giorgiy!”
     </p>
<p>
      It was like the outcry of passionate desire. Trirodov paused, saw her,
      impetuously white and clear in the moonlight. Elisaveta fell into his arms
      and kissed him and laughed, and kept on repeating without end:
    </p>
<p>
      “I love you, I love you, I love you.”
     </p>
<p>
      And they kissed, and they laughed, and said something to one another. The
      red and white roses of her strong, graceful body were chaste and
      uncrumpled. The words they said to one another were chaste and sacred. The
      chaste moon looked down on them, and the stars also, as they spoke the
      words that bound them to one another. There were vows and rites not less
      durable than any other kind. There were smiles, kisses, tender words—in
      these consist the eternal rite and the eternal mystery.
    </p>
<p>
      The sky began to lighten and a new dew fell on a new dawn, and when the
      sunrise had extended its rapturous flames the sun rose—only then
      they parted.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta returned to her room. But she could not sleep. She went into
      Elena’s room. Elena had only just awakened. Elisaveta lay down at her side
      under the bed-cover, and told her about her great love, her great joy.
      Elena rejoiced and laughed and kissed her sister without end.
    </p>
<p>
      Then Elisaveta put on her morning dress, and went to her father—to
      tell him about her joy, her happiness.
    </p>
<p>
      As for Trirodov, oppressed by morning fatigue, he walked home across the
      moist grass—and his soul was filled with perplexity and dread.
    </p>
<p>
      Later in the day he drove to the Rameyevs. He brought as a gift to
      Elisaveta a photograph he had taken of his first wife—upon her nude
      body was a bronze belt, its ends coming down to the knees being joined up
      in the front; upon her dark hair was a narrow round strip of gold. A
      slender, graceful body—a melancholy smile—intense dark eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      “Father knows,” said Elisaveta. “Father is glad. Let us go to him.”
     </p>
<p>
      When Elisaveta and Trirodov were once more alone, a dark thought came into
      Elisaveta’s mind. She became pensively sad, and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “What of the sleeper in the grave?”
     </p>
<p>
      “He has awakened,” replied Trirodov. “He’s in my house. We’ve dug up his
      grave just in time to save his mother from having any qualms of
      conscience.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What do you mean?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov explained:
    </p>
<p>
      “Early this morning the coroner had the grave dug up. They found the empty
      coffin. Luckily, I found out about this in time, before new stupid talk
      might arise, and gave them the necessary explanation.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What of the boy?” asked Elisaveta.
    </p>
<p>
      “He will remain with me. He does not wish to go to his mother, and he is
      not particularly necessary to her—she will receive money for him.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov said all this in a dry, cold voice.
    </p>
<p>
      The news that Elisaveta would become Trirodov’s wife acted differently on
      her relatives. Rameyev liked Trirodov, and was glad because of the closer
      connexion; he was a little sorry for Piotr, but thought it was well that
      the matter had come to a decision, and Piotr would no longer torment
      himself by entertaining false hopes. Nevertheless Rameyev was disturbed
      for some unknown reason.
    </p>
<p>
      Elena loved Elisaveta and shared her joy. She loved Piotr, and was,
      therefore, even more glad; she pitied him—and, therefore, loved him
      even more. She loved him so deeply, and entertained such hopes of his
      love, that her pity for him became serene and radiant. She looked at Piotr
      with loving eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr was in a state of despair. But Elena’s eyes aroused in him a sweet
      agitation for a new love. His wearied heart thirsted, and suffered
      intensely from deceived hopes.
    </p>
<p>
      Misha was strangely distraught. He flushed, and ran off more than usual
      with his fishing-rod to the river; there he wept. Now he impetuously
      embraced Elisaveta, now Trirodov. He felt ashamed and bitter. He knew that
      Elisaveta did not even suspect his love, and that she looked at him as at
      an infant. Sometimes in his helplessness he hated her. He said to Piotr:
    </p>
<p>
      “I shouldn’t walk about with a long face if I were you. She is not worthy
      of your love. She puts on airs. Elena is much better. Elena is a dear,
      while the other fancies all sorts of things.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr walked away from him in silence. And it was well that there was some
      one who did not scold, and with whom it was possible to ease his soul.
      Misha, too, wanted to be with Elisaveta, and it made him feel ashamed and
      depressed.
    </p>
<p>
      Miss Harrison did not express her opinion. Many things had already shocked
      her, and she grew accustomed to bear herself indifferently to everything
      that happened here. Trirodov, in her opinion, was an adventurer, a man
      with a doubtful reputation, and a dark past.
    </p>
<p>
      Elisaveta was the most tranquil of all.
    </p>
<p>
      Piotr’s gloomy appearance disturbed Rameyev. He wanted to comfort him if
      only with words. Luckily, people believe even in words! They must believe
      in something.
    </p>
<p>
      Rameyev and Piotr happened to find themselves alone. Rameyev said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I must confess that I once thought Elisaveta loved you. Or that she might
      love you, if you wished it strongly.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr said with a gloomy smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “I too may be pardoned for the error. All the more since M. Trirodov does
      not lack lovers.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Any one may be pardoned for mistakes,” answered Rameyev calmly, “though
      they may be painful enough sometimes.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr grumbled something. Rameyev continued:
    </p>
<p>
      “I have been observing Elisaveta very attentively of late. And listen to
      what I say—pardon me for my frankness—I have come to the
      conclusion that you’d be better off with Elena. Perhaps you have also
      erred in your feelings.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr replied with a bitter smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why, of course—Elena is more simple. She doesn’t read philosophic
      books, she doesn’t wear over-classical frocks; and doesn’t detest any
      one.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why drag self-love into everything?” asked Rameyev. “Elena is not as
      simple as you think. She is a very intelligent girl, though without
      pretensions to a deep and broad outlook—and she is good, attractive,
      and cheerful.”
     </p>
<p>
      “In fact, quite a match for me,” observed Piotr with an ironic smile.
    </p>
<p>
      “As for that,” said Rameyev, “you are not limited to choosing a charming
      wife from among my daughters.”
     </p>
<p>
      “That’s not so easy,” said Piotr with dejected irony. “But I see no need
      of insisting. Besides, the same thing might happen with Elena. She might
      come across a more brilliant match. And there are not a few charlatans in
      this world of the Trirodov brand.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Elena loves you,” said Rameyev. “Surely you have noticed it?”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr laughed. He assumed a gaiety—or did he actually feel gay and
      joyous at the sudden thought of the charming Elena? Of course she loved
      him! But he asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why do you think, my dear uncle, that I need a wife at all costs? May God
      be with her!”
     </p>
<p>
      “You are in love generally, as is common in your years,” said Rameyev.
    </p>
<p>
      “Perhaps,” said Piotr, “but Elisaveta’s choice revolts me.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why should it?” asked Rameyev.
    </p>
<p>
      “For many reasons,” replied Piotr. “For one thing, he presented her with a
      photograph of his dead wife, a naked beauty. Why? Is it right to make
      universal that which is intimate?<a href="#linknote-27" id="linknoteref-27" name="linknoteref-27"><small>27</small></a> She
      revealed her body to her husband, and not for Elisaveta and for us.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You would do away with many fine pictures if you had your way,” said
      Rameyev.
    </p>
<p>
      “I am not so simple as not to be able to make a distinction,” replied
      Piotr animatedly. “In the one case it is pure art, always sacred; in the
      other there is an effort to inflame the feelings with pornographic
      pictures. And don’t you notice it yourself, uncle, that Elisaveta has
      poisoned herself with this sweet poison, and has become terribly
      passionate and insufficiently modest?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I do not find this at all,” said Rameyev dryly.
    </p>
<p>
      “She is in love—so what’s to be done? If there is sensuality in
      people, what is to be done with nature? Shall the whole world be maimed in
      order to gratify a decrepit morality?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Uncle, I did not suspect you of being such an amoralist,” said Piotr in
      vexation.
    </p>
<p>
      “There is morality and morality,” replied Rameyev, not without some
      confusion. “I do not uphold depravity, but nevertheless demand freedom of
      thought and feeling. A free feeling is always innocent.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And what will you say of those naked girls in his woods—is that
      also innocent?” asked Piotr rather spitefully.
    </p>
<p>
      “Of course,” replied Rameyev. “His problem is to lull to sleep the beast
      in man, and to awaken the man.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I have heard his discourses,” said Piotr, showing his annoyance, “and I
      do not believe them in the slightest. I’m only astonished that others can
      believe such nonsense. And I don’t believe either in his poetry or in his
      chemistry. He has too many secrets and mysteries, too many cunning
      mechanisms in his doors and his corridors. Then there are his quiet
      children—that I do not understand at all. Where have they come from?
      What does he do with them? There is something nasty behind it all.”
     </p>
<p>
      “That’s a work of the imagination,” answered Rameyev. “We see him often,
      we can always go to him, and we haven’t seen or heard anything in his
      house or in his colony to confirm the town tattle about him.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr recalled the evening that he met Trirodov on the river-bank. His sad
      but determined eyes suddenly flared up in Piotr’s memory—and the
      poison of his spite grew weaker. He seemed affected as by a strange
      bewitchment, as if some one persistently yet quietly urged him to believe
      that the ways of Trirodov were fair and clean. Piotr closed his eyes—and
      the radiant vision appeared before him of the semi-nude girls of the wood,
      who filed past him, and sanctified him by the serenity and the peace of
      their chaste eyes. Piotr sighed and said quietly, as if fatigued:
    </p>
<p>
      “I have no cause to say these malicious words. Perhaps you are right. But
      it is so hard for me!”
     </p>
<p>
      Nevertheless this conversation did much to soothe Piotr. Thoughts about
      Elena returned to him oftener and oftener, and became more and more
      tender.
    </p>
<p>
      It so happened that, acting upon some unspoken yet understood agreement,
      every one tried to direct Piotr’s attention to Elena. Piotr submitted to
      this general influence, and was affectionate and gentle with Elena. Elena
      expectantly waited for his love; and at night, turning her blazing face
      and loosened locks in the direction of the nymph’s laughter, she would
      whisper:
    </p>
<p>
      “I love you, I love you, I love you!”
     </p>
<p>
      And when left alone with Piotr, she would look at him with love-frightened
      eyes, all rosy like the spring, and pulsating with expectancy; and with
      every sigh of her tender breast, and with all the life of her passionate
      body she would repeat the same unspoken words: “I love you, I love you, I
      love you.” And Piotr began to understand that he had met his fate in
      Elena, and that whether he willed it or not he would grow to love her.
      This presentiment of a new love was like a sweet gnawing in a heart
      wounded by treacherous love.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0028" name="link2HCH0028"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXVIII
    </h2>
<p>
      The local police department was not very skilful in tracking down thieves
      and murderers. And it did not occupy itself much with this ungrateful
      business. It had other things to think of in those turbulent days.
      Instead, it turned its ill-disposed attention to Trirodov’s educational
      colony—thanks to the efforts of Ostrov and his friends and patrons.
    </p>
<p>
      The neighbourhood of Trirodov’s estate began to teem with detectives. They
      assumed various guises, and though they employed all their cunning to
      escape observation they did not succeed in fooling any one. Of limited
      intelligence, they fulfilled their duties without inspiration, tediously,
      greyly, and dully.
    </p>
<p>
      Soon the children learned to recognize the detectives. Even at a distance
      they would say at the sight of a suspicious character:
    </p>
<p>
      “There goes a detective!”
     </p>
<p>
      Upon seeing him again they would say:
    </p>
<p>
      “There goes our detective!”
     </p>
<p>
      Of the uniformed police the first to make inquiries at Trirodov’s colony
      was a sergeant. He was fairly drunk It happened on the same day that
      Egorka returned home to his mother.
    </p>
<p>
      The sergeant entered the outer courtyard, the gates of which happened to
      have been left open by chance. A strong smell of vodka came from him. With
      the suspicious eye of an inexperienced spy he examined the barns, the
      ice-cellar, and the kitchen. He wondered stupidly at the cleanliness of
      the yard and the tidiness of the new buildings.
    </p>
<p>
      The sergeant was about to enter the kitchen in order to talk with some one
      about the business on which he had been sent, when quite suddenly he saw a
      young girl, one of the instructresses, Zinaida. She walked without haste
      in the yard, in a white-blue costume that reached to her knees. Zinaida
      had a cheerful, simple, sunburnt face. Her strong, bare arms swung lightly
      as she walked. It seemed as if the graceful girl were carried upon the
      earth without visible effort.
    </p>
<p>
      The chaste openness of her chaste body naturally aroused hideous thoughts
      in the half-drunken idiot. And was it possible to be otherwise in our dark
      days? Even in the tale of a poet in love with beauty, the nudity of a
      chaste body calls out the judgment of hypocrites and the rage of people
      with perverted imaginations, as if it were the arrogant nudity of a
      prostitute. The austere virtue of these people is attached to them
      externally. It cannot withstand any kind of temptation or enticement. They
      know this, and cautiously guard themselves from seduction. But in secret
      they console their miserable imaginations with unclean pictures of
      back-street lewdness, cheap, and regulated, and almost undangerous for
      their health and the welfare of their families.
    </p>
<p>
      The police sergeant, upon seeing the young girl, so lightly dressed, gave
      a lewd smile. His unclean desire stirred in his coarse body under its
      slovenly sweaty dress. He beckoned Zinaida to him with his crooked dirty
      finger and gave an idiotic laugh. He pushed his faded cap down to the back
      of his head.
    </p>
<p>
      The young girl walked up to the police sergeant with a light easy gait.
      Thus walk queens of beloved free lands, barefoot virgins crowned with
      white flowers, queens of lands of which our too Parisian age does not
      know.
    </p>
<p>
      The police sergeant whiffed his shag, vodka, and garlic at Zinaida, and
      smiling lasciviously, so that the green and the yellow of his crooked
      teeth showed conspicuously, he said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Look-a-here, my pretty girl—d’ye live here?”
     </p>
<p>
      Zinaida ingenuously marvelled at his red, dirty hands, at his red,
      provokingly perspiring face, his big, heavy, mud-bedraggled boots, and all
      those external tokens of the deformity of our poor, coarse life. They so
      quickly became unused to this deformity here in the valley of their
      beloved, innocent, tranquil life.
    </p>
<p>
      Zinaida replied with an involuntary smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, I live here in this colony.”
     </p>
<p>
      The police sergeant asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Are you the cook? Or the laundress? What a nice piece of sugar-candy you
      are!”
     </p>
<p>
      He burst into a shrill, neighing laugh, and was about to begin his
      offensively affectionate tactics—he lifted his open, tawny hand, and
      aimed his forefinger with a black border on a thick yellow finger-nail
      towards a place where he might jab, pinch, or tickle the barefoot,
      bare-armed girl. But Zinaida, smiling and frowning at the same time, edged
      away from him and answered:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’m an instructress in this school—Zinaida Ouzlova.”
     </p>
<p>
      The sergeant drawled out:
    </p>
<p>
      “An instructress! You are fibbing!”
     </p>
<p>
      He did not believe at first that she was an instructress. He thought that
      she was the cook, or the washerwoman, who had tucked up her dress in order
      to wash, scour, or cook more conveniently; and that she was joking with
      him. But after he had scrutinized her face more intently, a face such as a
      cook does not have, and her hands, such as a washerwoman does not have—he
      suddenly believed.
    </p>
<p>
      With astonishment and curiosity Zinaida eyed this strange, coarse,
      offensively affectionate creature with the heavy sabre in a black sheath
      dangling about his legs, and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “And who are you?”
     </p>
<p>
      The sergeant replied with a very important air:
    </p>
<p>
      “I am the local police sergeant.”
     </p>
<p>
      He tried to look dignified.
    </p>
<p>
      “What is it you want here?” asked Zinaida.
    </p>
<p>
      The sergeant turned to her with a wink and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Now tell me, my beauty, have you a runaway boy from town here? His mother
      is looking for him, and she’s notified the police. If he’s here with you,
      we’ve got to return him to town.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said Zinaida. “A town boy did spend a week with us here. We sent
      him home only to-day. He’s very likely with his mother now.”
     </p>
<p>
      The sergeant smiled incredulously, and asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “You’re not fibbing?”
     </p>
<p>
      Zinaida shrugged her shoulders. She looked sternly at the man, and said in
      astonishment:
    </p>
<p>
      “What are you saying? How is it possible to tell an untruth? And why
      should I tell you an untruth?”
     </p>
<p>
      “How is one to tell?” growled the sergeant. “Once I begin to believe you
      there are lots of things you might say.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’ve told you the truth,” asserted Zinaida once more.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, just be careful,” said the sergeant with dignity. “We’ll find out
      all the same. You are sure you’ve returned him home?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, home to his mother,” replied Zinaida.
    </p>
<p>
      “Very well, I shall report that to the Captain of the police.” He told a
      lie for dignity’s sake. It was the Commissary of the police who sent him
      here, and not the Captain. But it was all the same to Zinaida. She had got
      quite accustomed to thinking mostly about the children and her work. The
      stern reference to the police authorities did not impress her very much.
    </p>
<p>
      The police sergeant left. He kept up his broad smile. He looked back
      several times at the instructress. He was gay and flustered all the way to
      town. His thoughts were coarse and detestable. Such are the thoughts of
      the savages who take shelter in the grey expanses of our towns—savages
      who hide under all sorts of masks, and who strut about in all sorts of
      clothes.
    </p>
<p>
      Zinaida looked sadly after the police sergeant. Coarse recollections of
      former days revived in her soul, now full of delicious soothings of a
      different, blessed existence created by Trirodov in the quiet coolness of
      the beloved wood. Then Zinaida sighed as if awakened from a midday
      nightmare. She went quietly her own way.
    </p>
<p>
      In the course of several days Trirodov’s colony was visited by the
      Commissary of the police. He comprehended and considered the chaste world
      of the Prosianiya Meadows in the same way as the illiterate sergeant. Only
      this consideration expressed itself in a milder form.
    </p>
<p>
      The Commissary of the police tried to be very amiable. He paid awkward
      compliments to Trirodov and his instructresses. But when he looked at the
      instructresses the Commissary smiled as detestably as the sergeant. His
      small, narrow eyes, which resembled those of a Kalmyk, became oily with
      pleasure. His cheeks became covered with a brick-red ruddiness.
    </p>
<p>
      When the girls walked off to one side he gave a wink at Trirodov in their
      direction, and said in a <i>sotto voce</i>:
    </p>
<p>
      “A flower garden, eh?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov looked severely at the Commissary, who became flustered and
      rather angry. He said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I have come to you, I’m sorry to say, on unpleasant business.”
     </p>
<p>
      Indeed, he came under the pretext of discussing the arrangements of
      Egorka’s position. Incidentally, he hinted that the illegal opening of
      Egorka’s grave might give cause to an official investigation. Trirodov
      gave the Commissary a bribe and treated him to lunch. The Commissary of
      the police left in high spirits.
    </p>
<p>
      At last Trirodov had a visit from the Captain of the police. He had a
      gloomy, inaccessible look. He began quite bluntly about the illegal
      digging up of Egorka’s grave. Trirodov said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Surely it was impossible to leave a live boy to suffocate in a grave.”
     </p>
<p>
      The Captain replied in a rather austere voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “You should have notified the Prior of the cemetery church of your
      suspicions. He would have done all there was to be done.”
     </p>
<p>
      “But think how much time would have been lost in going after the priest,”
       said Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      The Captain, without listening, replied:
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s irregular. What would become of us if every one should take it into
      his head to open up graves! A chap might do it to steal something, and
      when he’s caught he might say that he’s heard the corpse was alive and
      turning in its grave.”
     </p>
<p>
      “You know very well,” retorted Trirodov, “that we didn’t go there with the
      object of robbery.”
     </p>
<p>
      But the Captain reiterated harshly and sternly:
    </p>
<p>
      “It’s irregular.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov invited the Captain to dinner. The Captain’s bribe was, of
      course, considerably larger than the Commissary’s. After a sumptuous
      dinner and drinks, and the bribe, the Captain suddenly became softer than
      wax. He began to dwell on the difficulties and annoyances of his position.
      Then Trirodov mentioned the search that had been made lately, and the
      beating the instructress Maria received at the police station. The Captain
      flushed with embarrassment and said with some warmth:
    </p>
<p>
      “Upon my honour, it didn’t depend upon me. I must follow orders. Our new
      Vice-Governor—forgive the expression—is a regular butcher.
      That’s how he’s made his career.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Is it possible to make one’s career by such means?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      The Captain spoke animatedly—and it was evident that the career of
      the new Vice-Governor agitated his official heart considerably.
    </p>
<p>
      “The facts must be familiar to you,” he said. “He killed his friend when
      he was drunk, was confined in a lunatic asylum, and how he ever got out is
      beyond comprehension. With the help of patronage he was given a position
      in the District Government and showed himself to be such an asp that every
      one marvelled. He quickly galloped into a councillorship. He subdued the
      peasants. Of course you must have heard about it?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Who hasn’t heard about it?” asked Trirodov quietly.
    </p>
<p>
      “The newspapers have certainly published enough about him,” the Captain
      continued. “Sometimes they added a trifle, but this was to his good. It
      turned every one’s attention to him. He was made Vice-Governor, and now he
      has redoubled his efforts, and is trying to distinguish himself further.
      He has an eye on the governorship. He is sure to go a long way. Our own
      Governor is on his guard on his account. I need not tell you what a
      powerful arm our Governor has in Petersburg. Nevertheless he can’t decide
      to thwart Ardalyon Borisovitch.<a href="#linknote-28" id="linknoteref-28" name="linknoteref-28"><small>28</small></a>”
     </p>
<p>
      “And yet in spite of that you....”
     </p>
<p>
      “Do please consider what a time we are living in,” said the Captain.
      “There never was anything like it. There is such an unrest among the
      peasants that may God have mercy on us. Only the other day they played the
      deuce on Khavriukin’s farm. They carried away everything that could be
      carried away. The muzhiks even took away all the live stock. A pitiful
      case. Khavriukin is considered among the better masters in our government.
      He held the peasants in the palm of his hand. And now they’ve paid him
      back!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Howsoever it may have happened,” said Trirodov, “still you did whip my
      instructress. That was rather shocking.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Please!” exclaimed the Captain. “I will personally ask her pardon. Like
      an honest man.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov sent for Maria. Maria came. The Captain of the police poured out
      his apologies before her, and covered her sunburnt hands with kisses.
      Maria was silent. Her face was pale, and her eyes were aflame with anger.
    </p>
<p>
      The Captain thought cautiously:
    </p>
<p>
      “Such a woman would not stop at murder.”
     </p>
<p>
      He made haste to take his leave.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0029" name="link2HCH0029"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXIX
    </h2>
<p>
      The educational police also conferred its presence on Trirodov’s school in
      the person of the Inspector of the National Schools.
    </p>
<p>
      The local Inspector of the National Schools, Leonty Andreyevitch Shabalov,
      had served all his life in remote, wooded places, and was for that reason
      quite an uncivilized being. Tall, robust, shaggy, unharmonious, he
      resembled even in external appearance a bear of Vologda or Olonetz. His
      face was overgrown with a thick beard. His thick hair crept down his low
      forehead towards his eyebrows. His back was broad and somewhat stooped,
      like a huge trough.
    </p>
<p>
      Shabalov frequently said to the instructors and instructresses in his
      district in a hoarse drawl:
    </p>
<p>
      “Batenka<a href="#linknote-29" id="linknoteref-29" name="linknoteref-29"><small>29</small></a>
      (or “golubushka"<a href="#linknote-30" id="linknoteref-30" name="linknoteref-30"><small>30</small></a> if it happened to be an
      instructress), brilliant instructors are not necessary. I don’t like
      clever men and women, I’m no respecter of modern ladies and dandies. The
      chief thing, batenka, in life and in service, is not to put on airs. In my
      opinion, batenka, if you perform your State obligations and conduct
      yourself peacefully you will find yourself well off. The educational
      programme has been worked out by people not more stupid than you and me,
      so that you and I needn’t spend our time philosophizing about programmes.
      That’s what I think, batenka!”
     </p>
<p>
      But, notwithstanding all his respect for educational programmes, Shabalov
      knew the educational business badly. It would be truer to say that he did
      not know it at all. He was hardly interested in it. He was not even very
      literate. He received his inspector’s position as a reward for his piety,
      patriotism, and correct mode of thinking, rather than for his labours in
      the interest of public instruction. He had served in his youth as a class
      assistant in the gymnasia. There, by a steady attendance at the gymnasia
      chapel and the reading of the apostles in a stentorian voice, he turned
      upon himself the attention of an old bigot of a general’s wife. She
      procured him the inspector’s position.
    </p>
<p>
      There was no way in which he could help the young and little-experienced
      instructors. When he visited the schools he limited himself to a
      superficial examination and gave the pupils several stupid questions,
      mostly on matters of piety, of “love towards the Fatherland and national
      pride."<a href="#linknote-31" id="linknoteref-31" name="linknoteref-31"><small>31</small></a>
</p>
<p>
      Above all, Shabalov loved to collect rumours and gossip. He did this with
      great ability and zeal. Every one knew this weakness of his. Consequently
      there were many eager to gossip and to inform against some one. There were
      even a number of informers among the instructors and instructresses who
      wished to gain favour and promotion. Once it was reported to Shabalov that
      teachers of both sexes in some of the neighbouring schools had gathered
      one holiday eve in one of the schools and sang songs there. He immediately
      sent them all a notification composed as follows:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  The School District of Rouban.

  No. 2187
  Skorodozh,
  16<i>th of September</i>, 1904.
</pre>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
Inspector of the National Schools of the first
  section of the Skorodozh Government. To
  Instructor of the Vikhliaevsky one-class
  rural school, Ksenofont Polupavlov:

  “Dear Sir, It has come to my knowledge
  that on the evening of the 7th of September you
  participated at a meeting of instructors and
  instructresses, which had been arranged without
  the necessary permit, and that you sang there
  with them songs of a worldly and reprehensible
  character. Therefore, dear sir, I beg you in
  the future not to permit yourself similar actions
  unbecoming to your schoolmaster’s vocation,
  and I herewith warn you that at a repetition of
  such behaviour you will be immediately discharged
  from the service.

  “Inspector Shabalov.”
 </pre>
<p>
      On another occasion he wrote to the same instructor:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  “On the occasion of an inspection of the schools
  of the section intrusted to me, a number of instructors
  and instructresses, and you, dear sir,
  among that number, have transgressed the limits
  of the programme ratified for Primary Schools
  by the authorities, in imparting to your pupils
  facts from history and geography unnecessary to
  the people; and therefore, in confirmation of
  certain verbal instructions I have already made
  to you in person, I beg you in the future to
  maintain strictly the established programmes;
  and I warn you that if you fail to comply you
  will be discharged from the service.”
 </pre>
<p>
      Shabalov was particularly displeased with the participation of certain
      instructors and instructresses in the local pedagogical circle. This
      circle was initiated in the town of Skorodozh some three years before by
      the gymnasia instructor Bodeyev and the town school instructor Voronok.
      The circle discussed various questions of upbringing, instruction, and
      school affairs generally which interested in those years many teachers and
      parents. Some of the members read their reports here. It was particularly
      provoking to Shabalov that these reports occasionally recounted certain
      episodes in school life and eccentricities of the educational authorities.
      Shabalov wanted to discharge the audacious ones. The District School
      Council did not agree with him. Then followed a long and unpleasant
      discussion, out of which Shabalov did not issue as conqueror.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov found it painful and difficult to talk with Shabalov.
    </p>
<p>
      Shabalov said in a slow, creaking voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Giorgiy Sergeyevitch, you will have to send your wards to town for
      examination.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why is it necessary?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      Shabalov laughed his creaking “he-he” laugh and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, it’s necessary. We’ll give them certificates.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What’s the use of your certificates to them?” asked Trirodov. “They need
      knowledge and not certificates. Your certificates won’t feed their
      hunger.”
     </p>
<p>
      “The certificates are necessary for military service,” explained Shabalov.
    </p>
<p>
      “They will remain pupils here,” said Trirodov, “until they are ready for
      practical work or for scientific and artistic occupations. Then some of
      them will go to technical schools, others to universities. Why, then,
      should they have certificates for a course in a Primary School?”
     </p>
<p>
      Shabalov repeated dully and stubbornly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Things are not done that way. Your school is counted among the Primary
      Schools. Those who have completed the course should receive certificates.
      How else can it be?—judge for yourself! And if you wish to go beyond
      the primary course, then you’ll have to procure for yourself a private
      gymnasia or a professional school, or, if you like, a commercial one. But
      what you want is impossible. And, of course, you’d have to engage real
      teachers in place of your cheap barefoots.”
     </p>
<p>
      “My barefoots,” retorted Trirodov, “have the same diplomas and learning as
      the real teachers, to use your expression. It is strange that you do not
      know or realize that fact. And they receive such ample pay from me that I
      should hesitate to call them cheap. Generally speaking, it seems to me
      that in its relation to private schools the so-called educational council
      would do well to limit itself to an external police surveillance of a
      purely negative character. They should merely see whether we commit
      anything of a criminal nature. But what business have you with the
      direction of schools? You have so few schools of your own, and yet they
      are so poor that you have quite a time to attend to them.”
     </p>
<p>
      Shabalov, somewhat subdued, replied:
    </p>
<p>
      “Still, the examination will have to be held. Surely you understand that?
      And the Headmaster of the National Schools is anxious to be present at the
      examination. We have our instructions from the Ministry, and it is
      impossible to discuss the matter. Our business is to execute orders.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Come here yourselves if it is absolutely necessary to hold an
      examination,” said Trirodov coldly.
    </p>
<p>
      “Very well,” said Shabalov upon reflection. “I will report your wish to
      the Headmaster of the National Schools. I don’t know how he will look upon
      the matter, but I will make my report.”
     </p>
<p>
      Then he reflected again briefly. He rubbed his back, covered by its blue
      official frock, against the back of his chair—the greasy, faded
      cloth against the handsome dark-green leather—and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “If the Headmaster agrees to it, we will appoint the day and send you the
      notification, that you may expect us.”
     </p>
<p>
      In the course of a few days Shabalov sent the announcement that the
      examination in Trirodov’s school was appointed to be held on May 30, at
      ten o’clock in the morning, on the premises.
    </p>
<p>
      This meddling on the part of the educational police annoyed Trirodov, but
      he had to submit to it.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0030" name="link2HCH0030"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXX
    </h2>
<p>
      Kirsha was acquainted with many boys in town. Some of them were pupils of
      the gymnasia, some of the town school. Kirsha was also acquainted with
      some of the students who attended the girls’ gymnasia. He told his father
      a great deal about the affairs and ways of these institutions. His
      information contained much that was singular and unexpected.
    </p>
<p>
      The personality of the Headmaster of the National Schools, Doulebov,
      particularly interested Trirodov of late. The schools under his guidance
      included the school established by Trirodov, though Doulebov contributed
      nothing to the school. He conducted himself with complete indifference to
      the aspersions cast at Priest Zakrasin and did not defend him before the
      Diocesan Bishop. He and his subordinate, the Inspector, showered official
      papers upon Trirodov and demanded various reports in the established form,
      so that Trirodov had to prevail upon a small official of the Exchequer to
      come evenings and copy out all this absurd nonsense. But neither Doulebov
      nor Shabalov looked in even once into Trirodov’s school. When Trirodov
      happened to be in the Headmaster’s office the conversation usually turned
      on documents concerning the instructresses and various petty formalities.
    </p>
<p>
      The calumnies of Ostrov and of his friends in the Black Hundred disturbed
      Doulebov. To avoid unpleasantness Doulebov decided to take advantage of
      the first opportunity to close Trirodov’s school.
    </p>
<p>
      The Headmaster of the National Schools, Actual State Councillor, Grigory
      Vladimirovitch Doulebov, had his eye on a higher position in the
      educational department. That was why he tried to gain favour by showing a
      meticulous attentiveness to his duties. His perseverance was astonishing.
      He never gave an impression of haste. His reception of subordinates and
      petitioners, announced on a placard on his door to take place on Thursdays
      between one and three, actually began at eleven in the morning, and
      continued until late in the evening. Doulebov spoke with each visitor
      slowly and showed his interest in the slightest detail.
    </p>
<p>
      But Doulebov, of course, knew very well that however great was his
      attentiveness to his duties, that in itself would not take him very far.
      It was indispensable to cultivate the proper personages. Doulebov had no
      influential aunts and grandmothers, and he had to make efforts on his own
      behalf. And in the whole course of his twenty-five years’ service,
      beginning as a gymnasia instructor, Doulebov uninterruptedly and skilfully
      concerned himself with establishing improved relations with all who were
      higher in rank than he or equal with him. He even made an effort to keep
      on good terms with the younger set—that was for an emergency; for—who
      can tell?—the younger sometimes go ahead of the old, and, being
      young, they might do one an injury—or a good service—when the
      opportunity offered.
    </p>
<p>
      Never to commit an untactful action—in that consisted the chief
      precept of Doubelov’s life. He knew very well that this or that action was
      not good in itself, and that the chief thing was “how they would look upon
      it”—they, that is, the authorities. The authorities were favourably
      inclined towards Doulebov. He had already been almost promised an
      assistantship to the head of the Educational District.
    </p>
<p>
      Doulebov adopted an attitude towards his subordinates consistent with this
      personal attitude. To those who acted respectfully towards him and his
      wife he gave his patronage and made efforts to improve their position. He
      defended them in unpleasant situations, though very cautiously, in order
      not to hurt his own position. He was not very fond of those who were
      disrespectful and independent, and he hindered them all he could.
    </p>
<p>
      Recognizing a rising luminary in the newly appointed Vice-Governor, who
      lately had been a Councillor in the District Government, Doulebov tried to
      come into agreeable relations with him also. But he conducted himself
      towards him very cautiously, so that he might not be suspected of too
      intimate relations with this evil, morose, badly trained man and his
      vulgar wife.
    </p>
<p>
      Doulebov had pleasant manners, a youngish face, and a slender voice which
      resembled the squeal of a young pig. He was light and agile in his
      movements. No one had ever seen him drunk, and as a visitor he either did
      not drink at all or limited himself to a glass of Madeira. He was always
      accompanied by his wife. It was said that she managed all his affairs, and
      that Doulebov obeyed her implicitly in everything.
    </p>
<p>
      The wife of the Headmaster, Zinaida Grigorievna, was a plump, energetic,
      and shrewish woman. Her short hair was beginning to get grey. She was very
      jealous of her influence and maintained it with great energy.
    </p>
<p>
      At Doulebov’s invitation the Vice-Governor visited the town school. In
      inviting the Vice-Governor Doulebov had especially in view the idea of
      taking him to the Trirodov school. In the event of the school being
      closed, he wanted to say that it was done at the instigation of the
      governmental authorities. But Doulebov did not wish to invite the
      Vice-Governor direct to Trirodov’s school, so as to give no one any reason
      for saying that he did it on purpose. That was why he persuaded the
      Vice-Governor to come to the examination at the town school on the eve of
      the day appointed for the examinations at the Trirodov school.
    </p>
<p>
      The town school was situated in one of the dirty side streets. Its
      exterior was highly unattractive. The dirty, dilapidated wooden structure
      seemed as if it were built for a tavern rather than for a school. This did
      not prevent Doulebov from saying to the inspector of the school:
    </p>
<p>
      “The new Vice-Governor will visit you to-day. I invited him to you because
      you have such a fine school.”
     </p>
<p>
      Inspector Poterin, fawning before Doulebov and his wife, said in a
      flustered way:
    </p>
<p>
      “Our building is anything but showy.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebov smiled amiably and replied encouragingly:
    </p>
<p>
      “The building is not the important thing. The school itself is good. The
      instruction is to be valued and not the walls.”
     </p>
<p>
      The Vice-Governor arrived rather late, at eleven, together with Zherbenev,
      who was an honorary overseer of the school.
    </p>
<p>
      There was a very tense feeling in the school. The instructors and the
      students alike trembled before the authorities. Stupid and vulgar scenes
      with the Headmaster in the town school were common with Doulebov and did
      not embarrass him. As for Doulebov and his wife, they were fully alive to
      their importance. They had received only two or three days before definite
      news of the appointment of Doulebov as assistant to the head of the
      Educational Department.
    </p>
<p>
      Inspector Shabalov arrived at the school very early that day. He occupied
      himself with attentions to Zinaida Grigorievna Doulebova, to whom he
      showed various services with an unexpected and rather vulgar amiableness.
    </p>
<p>
      The instructor-inspector, Mikhail Prokopievitch Poterin, conducted himself
      like a lackey. It was even evident at times that he trembled before the
      Doulebovs. What reason had he to be afraid? He was a great patriot—a
      member of the Black Hundred. He accepted bribes, beat his pupils, drank
      considerably—and he always got off easily.
    </p>
<p>
      Zinaida Grigorievna Doulebova examined the graduating classes in French
      and English. These studies were optional. Inspector Poterin’s wife gave
      instruction in French. She had not yet fully mastered the Berlitz method,
      and looked at the Doulebovs cringingly. But at heart she was bitter—at
      her poverty, abjectness, and dependence.
    </p>
<p>
      Poterin knew no languages; but he was also present here, and hissed
      malignantly at those who answered awkwardly or did not answer at all:
    </p>
<p>
      “Blockhead! Numskull!”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebova sat motionless and made no sign that she heard this zealous
      hissing and these coarse words. She would give freedom to her tongue
      later, at luncheon.
    </p>
<p>
      A luncheon had been prepared for the visitors and the instructors. It cost
      Poterin’s wife much trouble and anxiety. The table was set in the large
      room, where on ordinary days the small boys made lively and wrangled in
      recess-time. They were excluded on this day, and raised a racket outside.
    </p>
<p>
      Doulebova sat at the head of the table, between the Vice-Governor and
      Zherbenev; Doulebov sat next to the Vice-Governor. A pie was brought in;
      then tea. Zinaida Grigorievna abused the instructors’ wives and the
      instructresses. She loved gossip—indeed, who does not? The
      instructors’ wives gossiped to her.
    </p>
<p>
      During the luncheon the small boys, having resumed their places in the
      neighbouring class, sang:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  <i>What songs, what songs,
  Our Russia does sing.
  Do what you like—though you burst,
  Frenchman, you’ll never sing like that</i>.
</pre>
<p>
      And other songs in the same spirit.
    </p>
<p>
      Doulebov wiped his face with his right hand—like a cat licking its
      paw—and piped out:
    </p>
<p>
      “I hear that the Marquis Teliatnikov is to pay us a visit soon.”
     </p>
<p>
      “We are not within his jurisdiction,” said Poterin.
    </p>
<p>
      But his whole face became distorted with apprehension.
    </p>
<p>
      “All the same,” said Doulebov in his thin voice, “he possesses great
      powers. He can do what he likes.”
     </p>
<p>
      The Vice-Governor looked gloomily at Poterin and said morosely:
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s going to pull you all up.”
     </p>
<p>
      Poterin grew deathly pale and broke out into perspiration. The
      conversation about the Marquis Teliatnikov continued, and the local
      revolutionary ferment was mentioned in the course of it.
    </p>
<p>
      Revolutionary proclamations had appeared in all the woods of the
      neighbourhood. Large pieces of bark were cut off the trees and
      proclamations pasted on. It was impossible to remove these bills, which
      were overrun by a thin, transparent coating of resin. The zealous
      preservers of order had either to chop out or to scrape off the obnoxious
      places with a knife.
    </p>
<p>
      “I think,” said Doulebova, “that it must be an idea of our chemist, Mr.
      Trirodov.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Of course.” She was confirmed in her suggestion by the cringing,
      dry-looking instructress of German.
    </p>
<p>
      Zinaida Grigorievna turned towards Poterina in order to show favour to her
      hostess by her conversation, and asked her with an amused smile:
    </p>
<p>
      “How do you like our celebrated Decadent?”
     </p>
<p>
      The instructress tried to understand. An expression of fear showed on her
      flat, dull face. She asked timidly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Whom do you mean, Zinaida Grigorievna?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Whom else could I mean but Mr. Trirodov,” replied Doulebova malignantly.
    </p>
<p>
      The malice was all on Trirodov’s account, but nevertheless Poterina
      trembled with fear.
    </p>
<p>
      “Ah, yes, Trirodov; how then, how then....” she repeated in a worried,
      flustered way, and was at a loss what to say.
    </p>
<p>
      Doulebova said bitingly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, I don’t think he laughs very often. He ought to be to your taste.”
     </p>
<p>
      “To my taste!” exclaimed Poterina with a flushed face. “What are you
      saying, Zinaida Grigorievna! As the old saying goes: ‘The Tsar’s servant
      has been bent into a harness arch!’”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, he always looks askance at you and talks to no one,” said the wife
      of the instructor Krolikov; “but he is a very kind man.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebova turned her malignant glance upon her. Krolikova grew pale with
      fear, and guessed that she had not said the right thing. She corrected
      herself:
    </p>
<p>
      “He is a kind man in his words.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebova smiled at her benevolently.
    </p>
<p>
      “Do you know what I think?” said Zherbenev, addressing himself to
      Doulebova. “I have seen many men in my time, I may say without boasting;
      and in my opinion, it is a very bad sign that he looks askance at you.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Of course!” agreed Poterina. “That is the honest truth!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Let a man look me straight in my face,” went on Zherbenev. “But the quiet
      ones....”
     </p>
<p>
      Zherbenev did not finish his sentence. Doulebova said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Frankly, I don’t like your poet. I can’t understand him. There is
      something strange about him—something disagreeable.”
     </p>
<p>
      “He’s altogether suspicious,” said Zherbenev with the look of a person who
      knew a great deal.
    </p>
<p>
      It was asserted that Trirodov and others were collecting money for an
      armed revolt. At this they looked significantly at Voronok. Voronok
      retorted, but he was not heard. There was an outburst of malignant remarks
      against Trirodov. It was said that there was a secret underground printing
      establishment in Trirodov’s house, and that not only the instructresses
      worked there but also Trirodov’s young wards. The women exclaimed in
      horror:
    </p>
<p>
      “They are mere tots!”
     </p>
<p>
      “What do you think of your tots now?”
     </p>
<p>
      “There are no children nowadays.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’ve just heard,” said Voronok, “that a nine-year-old boy is kept in
      confinement by the police.”
     </p>
<p>
      “The young rebel!” said the Vice-Governor savagely.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, and I’ve also heard,” said Poterin, “that a thirteen-year-old boy
      has been arrested. Such a little beggar, and already in revolt.”
     </p>
<p>
      The Vice-Governor said morosely:
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s going with his grandfather to Siberia.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Why?” asked Voronok with a flushed face.
    </p>
<p>
      “He laughed,” growled the Vice-Governor morosely.
    </p>
<p>
      Doulebov turned to Poterin and asked in a loud voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “And I hope you have no rebels in your school.”
     </p>
<p>
      “No, thank God, I have nothing of that kind,” replied Poterin. “But, to
      tell the truth, the children are very loose nowadays.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebov, with a patronizing amiableness, said again to him:
    </p>
<p>
      “You have a good school. Everything is in exemplary order.”
     </p>
<p>
      Poterin grew radiant and boasted:
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, I know how to pull them up. I treat them sternly.”
     </p>
<p>
      “A salutary sternness,” said Doulebov.
    </p>
<p>
      Encouraged by these words, the instructor-inspector asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Do you think one might also beat them?”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebov avoided a direct answer. He wiped his face with his hand—like
      a cat using its paw—and changed the subject.
    </p>
<p>
      They began touching recollections about the good old times. They began to
      relate how, where, and whom they birched.
    </p>
<p>
      “They birch even now,” said Shabalov with a quiet joy.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0031" name="link2HCH0031"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXXI
    </h2>
<p>
      After luncheon they went into the assembly room. Some of them began to
      smoke. Instructor Mouralov’s wife took advantage of an opportune moment to
      speak to Doulebova. She cautiously stole up to her when she saw her
      standing aside and told her that Poterin took bribes. Separate phrases and
      words were distinguished from the rest of the conversation.
    </p>
<p>
      “Have you noticed, Zinaida Grigorievna?”
     </p>
<p>
      “What’s that?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Our inspector is parading in gloves.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Gloves! Yellow ones!”
     </p>
<p>
      “What of that?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Out of bribes.”
     </p>
<p>
      Zinaida Grigorievna was overjoyed, and grew animated. For a long time the
      whispers of the malicious women were audible, and between their whispers
      their hissing, snake-like laughter.
    </p>
<p>
      Then the women, together with Shabalov and Voronok, went off to finish the
      examination. Doulebov and the Vice-Governor went in to look at the
      library. Poterin accompanied them. Everything was in order. The thick
      volumes of Katkov<a href="#linknote-32" id="linknoteref-32" name="linknoteref-32"><small>32</small></a> quietly slumbered; the dust had
      been wiped from them on the eve of the Vice-Governor’s visit.
    </p>
<p>
      Poterin made use of an opportunity to make insinuations against the
      instructors. He reported that Voronok did not go to church, and that he
      collected schoolboys at his own house in order to read something or other
      to them.
    </p>
<p>
      “I shall have to have a talk with him,” said Doulebov. “Ask him into your
      study and I will talk to him. In the meantime, show Ardalyon Borisovitch
      the laboratory.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebov and Voronok spoke for a long time in Poterin’s study.
    </p>
<p>
      “I don’t question your convictions,” said the Headmaster, “but I must make
      it clear to you that it is impossible to introduce politics into schools.
      Children cannot discuss such questions; it does them harm.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Agents’ reports are not always to be believed,” said Voronok
      restrainedly.
    </p>
<p>
      Doulebov flushed slightly and said in an annoyed manner.
    </p>
<p>
      “We don’t maintain agents, but we have many acquaintances. We have lived
      here a long time. It is impossible not to hear what is told us.”
     </p>
<p>
      The honorary overseer, Zherbenev, invited all who attended the examination
      to his house to dinner. Only Voronok refused the invitation. But Zherbenev
      invited others to the dinner—the general’s widow, Glafira Pavlovna,
      and Kerbakh among them. It was a long and lavish dinner. The guests drank
      much during and after the meal. Every one got tipsy. Doulebov alone
      remained sober. The liqueurs only made him look slightly ruddier—he
      was very fond of them.
    </p>
<p>
      The members of the Black Hundred took advantage of the occasion to say
      something malicious about Trirodov to Doulebov and the Vice-Governor. The
      Trirodov school began to be discussed rather vulgarly.
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s taken up photography; quite keen on it.”
     </p>
<p>
      “He calls in children, makes them take everything off, and photographs
      them.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, and he’s got naked children running about in the woods.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Children? The instructresses too!”
     </p>
<p>
      “They may not be exactly naked, but they are always running about
      barefoot.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Just like peasant women,” said Zherbenev.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said the Vice-Governor. “It is very immoral for women to go about
      barefoot. It must be stopped.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They are poor people,” said some one.
    </p>
<p>
      “It is pornography!” said the Vice-Governor savagely.
    </p>
<p>
      And every one suddenly believed him. The Vice-Governor said morosely:
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s lodged a complaint against us for whipping his instructress. But he
      is lying; he’s whipped her himself. We have no need of whipping girls—but
      he does it because he’s a corrupt man.”
     </p>
<p>
      Some one made the observation that Trirodov was friends with dangerous
      sects, at which Kerbakh remarked:
    </p>
<p>
      “He now has horses and carriages, but I know a man who knew him when he
      had only his shirt. It is rather suspicious as to where he got his money.”
     </p>
<p>
      Glafira Pavlovna looked at Shabalov and whispered to Doulebov:
    </p>
<p>
      “I know he is a patriot, but he has terrible manners.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebov said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I know he is very stupid and undeveloped, but zealous. If directed
      properly he can be very useful.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
      Next morning the Headmaster of the National Schools, accompanied by the
      Vice-Governor and Shabalov, started in their carriages from the
      Headmaster’s offices and drove off to Trirodov’s school in the Prosianiya
      Meadows. They had not yet fully recovered from the previous day’s carouse.
      They carried on their indecent, half-tipsy conversations in the midst of
      nature’s loveliness. They looked like a lot of picnickers.
    </p>
<p>
      Zinaida Grigorievna and Kerbakh, who were in one carriage, were engaged in
      a malicious conversation. They tore their acquaintances to shreds. She
      began with Poterin’s gloves. Then she related about the suicide of another
      inspector’s mistress; she drowned herself because she was about to have a
      child. Then she told about a third inspector who got drunk in a bath-house
      and got into a tussle there with the mayor of the town.
    </p>
<p>
      Shabalov was riding in a trap with Zherbenev.
    </p>
<p>
      “It would be good to have a tasty snack,” he said.
    </p>
<p>
      “We are sure to get something there,” replied Zherbenev confidently.
    </p>
<p>
      The visitors were all confident that they were being awaited. Zinaida
      Grigorievna said:
    </p>
<p>
      “The most interesting part of it will be hidden of course.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes, but we’ll investigate.”
     </p>
<p>
      It was a fresh, early morning. The road went through the wood. They had
      now driven for a long time. It seemed as if the same meadows and woods,
      copses, streams, and bridges repeated themselves again and again. They
      began to ask the drivers:
    </p>
<p>
      “Are you sure you’re going the right way?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Perhaps you’ve lost your way.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I think it’s in that direction.”
     </p>
<p>
      The two towers of Trirodov’s house soon became visible. They appeared to
      the right, and yet it was impossible to find the way to them. For a long
      time they blundered. The roads spread and branched out at this point. At
      last the driver of the first carriage stopped his horses, and behind it
      the other carriages came to a standstill.
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ll have to ask some one,” said the driver. “There’s some sort of a boy
      coming this way.”
     </p>
<p>
      A ten-year-old, barefoot boy could be seen coming down the road from the
      wood. Shabalov shouted savagely at him:
    </p>
<p>
      “Stop!”
     </p>
<p>
      The boy glanced at the carriages and calmly walked on. Shabalov cried more
      furiously this time:
    </p>
<p>
      “Stop, you young brat! Off with your cap! Don’t you see that gentlemen are
      coming—why don’t you bow to them?”
     </p>
<p>
      The boy paused. He looked in astonishment at the variety of carriages and
      did not take his cap off. Doulebova decided:
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s simply an idiot!”
     </p>
<p>
      “Well, we shall make him talk,” said Kerbakh.
    </p>
<p>
      He left his carriage and, going up to the boy, asked him:
    </p>
<p>
      “Do you know where Trirodov’s school is?”
     </p>
<p>
      The boy silently pointed to one of the roads with his hand. Then he ran
      off quickly, and disappeared somewhere among the bushes.
    </p>
<p>
      At last the road went along a fence. Everything all around seemed deserted
      and quiet. Evidently no one awaited the visitors or had arranged to meet
      them.
    </p>
<p>
      Finally they reached the gates of the enclosure. They looked around. It
      was very quiet. No one was visible anywhere. Shabalov jumped out of his
      trap and began to look for the bell. Madame Doulebova said in great
      irritation:
    </p>
<p>
      “What do you think of that?”
     </p>
<p>
      They tried to open the small gate by themselves but were unable. Shabalov
      cried out:
    </p>
<p>
      “Open the gate! You devils, demons, sinners!”
     </p>
<p>
      Madame Doulebova tried to soothe Shabalov, who justified himself:
    </p>
<p>
      “Forgive me, Zinaida Grigorievna. It is most annoying. If I had come
      myself I shouldn’t have minded waiting, though even then it would have
      been discourteous—being, after all, an official. And here the higher
      authorities have announced their coming, and these people pay absolutely
      no attention to it.”
     </p>
<p>
      At last the small gate opened, suddenly and noiselessly. A boy, sunburnt
      and barefoot, in a white shirt and short white breeches, stood on the
      threshold. The angry Doulebov said in his thin, shrill voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “Is this Trirodov’s school?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said the boy.
    </p>
<p>
      The visitors entered and found themselves in a small glade. Three barefoot
      girls slowly came to meet them. These were instructresses. Nadezhda
      Vestchezerova looked with her large dark eyes at Madame Doulebova, who
      whispered to the Vice-Governor:
    </p>
<p>
      “Have a look at her. This girl had a scandal in her life, but he’s taken
      her on.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebova knew every one in town, and she knew especially well those who
      have had an unpleasant experience of some sort.
    </p>
<p>
      Presently Trirodov appeared in a white summer suit. He looked with an
      ironic smile at the gaily dressed party of visitors.
    </p>
<p>
      The visitors were met with courtesy; but the Headmaster was displeased
      because no honour was shown them and no special preparations were evident.
      The instructresses were dressed as simply as always. Doulebov was
      especially displeased because both the instructresses and their pupils
      walked about barefoot. The naïveté of the children irritated the visitors.
      The children looked at the party indifferently. Some of them nodded a
      greeting, others did not.
    </p>
<p>
      “Take off your cap!” shouted Shabalov.
    </p>
<p>
      The boy pulled his cap off and reached it out to Shabalov with the remark:
    </p>
<p>
      “Here!”
     </p>
<p>
      Shabalov growled savagely:
    </p>
<p>
      “Idiot!”
     </p>
<p>
      Then he turned away. The boy looked at him in astonishment.
    </p>
<p>
      Doulebov, and even more his wife, were terribly annoyed because they had
      not put on more clothes for their visitors, not even shoes. The
      Vice-Governor looked dully and savagely. Everything displeased him at
      once. Doulebov asked with a frown:
    </p>
<p>
      “Surely they are not always like that?”
     </p>
<p>
      “Always, Vladimir Grigorievitch,” replied Trirodov. “They have got used to
      it.”
     </p>
<p>
      “But it is indecent!” said Madame Doulebova.
    </p>
<p>
      “It is the one thing that is decent,” retorted Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0032" name="link2HCH0032"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXXII
    </h2>
<p>
      The windows of the house in the small glade were wide open. The twitter of
      birds was audible and the fresh, delicious aroma of flowers entered in. It
      was here the children gathered, and the miserable farce of the examination
      began. Doulebov stood up before an ikon on one side of the room, assumed a
      stately air, and exclaimed:
    </p>
<p>
      “Children, rise to prayer.”
     </p>
<p>
      The children rose. Doulebov thrust a finger forward towards a dark-eyed
      boy’s breast and shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “Read, boy!”
     </p>
<p>
      The thin, shrill outcry and the movement of the finger towards the child’s
      breast were so unexpected by the boy that he trembled and gave a choking
      sound. Some one behind him laughed, another gave an amused chuckle.
      Doulebova exchanged glances with Kerbakh and shrugged her shoulders; her
      face expressed horror.
    </p>
<p>
      The boy quickly recovered himself and read the prayer.
    </p>
<p>
      “Sit down, children,” ordered Doulebov.
    </p>
<p>
      The children resumed their places, while the elders seated themselves at a
      table in the order of their rank—the Vice-Governor and Doulebov in
      the middle, with the others to their right and left. Doulebova looked
      round with an anxious, angry expression. At last she said in a bass voice,
      extraordinarily coarse for a woman:
    </p>
<p>
      “Shut the windows. The birds are making a noise, and the wind too; it is
      impossible to do anything.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov looked at her in astonishment. He said quietly to Nadezhda:
    </p>
<p>
      “Close the windows. Our guests can’t stand fresh air.”
     </p>
<p>
      The windows were shut. The children looked with melancholy tedium at the
      depressing window-panes.
    </p>
<p>
      Writing exercises were given. A little tale was read aloud from a reader
      brought by Shabalov. Doulebov asked the class to compose it in their own
      words.
    </p>
<p>
      The boys and girls were about to pick up their pens, but Doulebov stopped
      them and delivered a long and tedious dissertation on how to write the
      given composition. Then he said:
    </p>
<p>
      “Now you can write it.”
     </p>
<p>
      The children wrote. It was quiet. The writers handed in their papers to
      their instructresses. Doulebov and Shabalov looked them over there and
      then. They tried to find mistakes, but there were few. Then dictation was
      given.
    </p>
<p>
      Doulebova looked morosely the whole while and blinked often. Trirodov
      tried to enter into conversation with her, but the angry dame answered so
      haughtily that it was with great difficulty he refrained from smiling, and
      finally he left the malicious woman to herself.
    </p>
<p>
      After the written exercises Trirodov asked the uninvited guests to
      luncheon.
    </p>
<p>
      “It was such a long journey here,” said Doulebov as if he were explaining
      why he did not refuse the invitation to eat.
    </p>
<p>
      The children scattered a short way into the wood, while the elders went
      into a neighbouring house, where the luncheon was ready. The conversation
      during luncheon was constrained and captious. The Doulebovs tried all
      sorts of pinpricks and coarse insinuations; their companions followed
      suit. Every one tried to outdo the other in saying caustic, spiteful
      things.
    </p>
<p>
      Doulebov looked with simulated horror at Trirodov’s instructresses who
      happened to be present, and whispered to Kerbakh:
    </p>
<p>
      “Their feet are soiled with earth.”
     </p>
<p>
      After luncheon they returned to the school. All resumed their former
      places. Then the oral examination began. Doulebov bent over the roll-call
      and called out three boys at once. Each of them was questioned first about
      the Holy Scriptures, and immediately afterwards about the Russian language
      and arithmetic.
    </p>
<p>
      The examiners cavilled at everything. Nothing satisfied Doulebov. He gave
      questions the answers to which were bound to make evident whether higher
      feelings were being instilled in the children—of love for the
      Fatherland, of allegiance to the Tsar, and of devotion to the Orthodox
      Church. He asked one boy:
    </p>
<p>
      “Which country is better, Russia or France?”
     </p>
<p>
      The boy thought a while and said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I don’t know. It depends upon which place a man is used to—there he
      is better off.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebova laughed viperously. Shabalov said in a preceptorial manner:
    </p>
<p>
      “The orthodox <i>matushka</i><a href="#linknote-33" id="linknoteref-33" name="linknoteref-33"><small>33</small></a> Russia! Is it possible to
      compare any kingdom with ours? Have you heard how our native land is
      called? Holy Russia, Mother Russia, the holy Russian soil. And you are an
      idiot, blockhead, a little swine. If you don’t like your Fatherland what
      are you good for?”
     </p>
<p>
      The boy flushed. Tiny tears gleamed in his eyes. Doulebov asked:
    </p>
<p>
      “Now tell me what is the very best faith in this world.”
     </p>
<p>
      The boy fell into thought. Shabalov asked malignantly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Can’t you answer even that?”
     </p>
<p>
      The boy said:
    </p>
<p>
      “When one believes sincerely, then it is the very best faith for him.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What a blockhead!” said Shabalov with conviction.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov looked at him in astonishment. He said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “The sincerity of religious mood is surely the best indication of a saving
      faith.”
     </p>
<p>
      “We’ll discuss that later,” piped out Doulebov sternly. “This is not a
      convenient moment.”
     </p>
<p>
      “As you like,” said Trirodov with a smile. “It is all the same to me when
      you discuss it.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebov, red with agitation, rose from his chair and, going up to
      Trirodov, said to him:
    </p>
<p>
      “It is absolutely necessary that I should have a talk with you.”
     </p>
<p>
      “At your service,” said Trirodov, not without some astonishment.
    </p>
<p>
      “Please continue,” said Doulebov to Shabalov.
    </p>
<p>
      Doulebov and Trirodov went into the next room. Their conversation soon
      assumed a very sharp character. Doulebov made some savage accusations and
      said rather vehemently:
    </p>
<p>
      “I have heard improper things about your school, but, indeed, the reality
      exceeds all expectations.”
     </p>
<p>
      “What is there precisely improper?” asked Trirodov. “In what way has
      reality surpassed gossip?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I don’t collect gossip,” squealed Doulebov excitedly. “I see with my own
      eyes. This is not a school but a pornography!”
     </p>
<p>
      His voice had already passed into piggish tones. He struck the table with
      his palm. There was the hard sound of the wedding-ring against the wood.
      Trirodov said:
    </p>
<p>
      “I too have heard that you were a man with self-control. But this is not
      the first time to-day that I’ve noticed your violent movements.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebov made an effort to recover himself. He said more quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “It is a revolting pornography!”
     </p>
<p>
      “And what do you call pornography?” asked Trirodov.
    </p>
<p>
      “Don’t you know?” said Doulebov with a sarcastic smile.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, I know,” said Trirodov. “In my conception every written lechery and
      disfigurement of beautiful truth to gratify the low instincts of the
      man-beast—that is pornography. Your thrice-assured State school—that
      is the true example of pornography.”
     </p>
<p>
      “They walk about naked here!” squealed Doulebov.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov retorted:
    </p>
<p>
      “They will be healthier and cleaner than those children who leave your
      school.”
     </p>
<p>
      Doulebov shouted:
    </p>
<p>
      “Even your instructresses walk about naked. You’ve taken on depraved girls
      as instructresses.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov replied calmly:
    </p>
<p>
      “That’s a lie!”
     </p>
<p>
      The Headmaster said sharply and excitedly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Your school—if this awful, impossible establishment can be called a
      school—will be closed at once. I will make the application to the
      District to-day.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov replied sharply:
    </p>
<p>
      “That you can do.”
     </p>
<p>
      Soon the visitors left in an ugly frame of mind. Doulebova hissed and
      waxed indignant the whole way back.
    </p>
<p>
      “He’s clearly a dangerous man,” observed Kerbakh.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2HCH0033" name="link2HCH0033"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      CHAPTER XXXIII
    </h2>
<p>
      Piotr and Rameyev arrived at Trirodov’s together. Rameyev more than once
      said to Piotr that he had been very rude to Trirodov, and that he ought to
      smooth out matters somehow. Piotr agreed very unwillingly.
    </p>
<p>
      Once more they talked about the war.<a href="#linknote-34" id="linknoteref-34" name="linknoteref-34"><small>34</small></a> Trirodov
      asked Rameyev:
    </p>
<p>
      “I think you see only a political significance in this war.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And do you disagree with me?” asked Rameyev.
    </p>
<p>
      “No,” said Trirodov, “I admit that. But, in my opinion, aside from the
      stupid and criminal actions of these or other individuals, there are more
      general causes. History has its own dialectic. Whether or not a war had
      taken place is all the same: there would have been a fated collision in
      any case, in one or another form; there would have begun the decisive
      struggle between two worlds, two comprehensions of the world, two
      moralities, Buddha and Christ.”
     </p>
<p>
      “The teachings of Buddhism resemble those of Christianity considerably,”
       said Piotr. “That is its only value.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said Trirodov. “There appears to be a great resemblance at the
      first glance; but actually these two systems are as opposite as the poles.
      They are the affirmation and the denial of life, its Yes and its No, its
      irony and its lyricism. The affirmation, Yes, is Christianity; the denial,
      No, is Buddhism.”
     </p>
<p>
      “That seems to me to be too much of a generalization,” said Rameyev.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov continued:
    </p>
<p>
      “I generalize for the sake of clearness. The present moment in history is
      especially convenient. It is history’s zenith hour. Now that Christianity
      has revealed the eternal contradiction of the world, we are passing
      through the poignant struggle of those two world conceptions.”
     </p>
<p>
      “And not the struggle of the classes?” asked Rameyev.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said Trirodov, “there is also the struggle of the classes, to
      whatever degree two inimical factors enter into the struggle—social
      justice and the real relation of forces—a common morality, which is
      always static, and a common dynamism. The Christian element is in
      morality, the Buddhistic in dynamism. Indeed, the weakness of Europe
      consists in that its life has already for a long time nourished itself on
      a substance Buddhistic in origin.”
     </p>
<p>
      Piotr said confidently, in the voice of a young prophet:
    </p>
<p>
      “In this duel Christianity will triumph—not the historic
      Christianity, of course, and not the present, but the Christianity of St.
      John and the Apocalypse. And it will triumph only then when everything
      will appear lost, and the world will be in the power of the yellow
      Antichrist.”
     </p>
<p>
      “I don’t think that will happen,” said Trirodov quietly.
    </p>
<p>
      “I suppose you think Buddha will triumph,” said Piotr in vexation.
    </p>
<p>
      “No,” replied Trirodov calmly.
    </p>
<p>
      “The devil, perhaps!” exclaimed Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      “Petya!” exclaimed Rameyev reproachfully.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov lowered his head slightly, as if he were confused, and said
      tranquilly:
    </p>
<p>
      “We see two currents, equally powerful. It would be strange that either
      one of them should conquer. That is impossible. It is impossible to
      destroy half of the whole historical energy.”
     </p>
<p>
      “However,” said Piotr, “if neither Christ nor Buddha conquers, what awaits
      us? Or is that fool Guyau right when he speaks of the irreligiousness of
      future generations?"<a href="#linknote-35" id="linknoteref-35" name="linknoteref-35"><small>35</small></a>
</p>
<p>
      “There will be a synthesis,” replied Trirodov. “You will accept it for the
      devil.”
     </p>
<p>
      “This contradictory mixture is worse than forty devils!” exclaimed Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      The visitors soon left.
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha came without being called—confused and agitated by an
      indefinable something. He was silent, and his dark eyes flamed with
      sadness and fear. He walked up to the window, looked out in an attitude of
      expectancy. He seemed to see something in the distance. There was a look
      of apprehension in his dark, wide-open eyes, as if they were fixed on a
      strange distant vision. Thus people look during a hallucination.
    </p>
<p>
      Kirsha turned to his father and, growing pale, said quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Father, a visitor has come to you from quite afar. How strange that he
      has come in a simple carriage and in ordinary clothes! I wonder why he has
      come?”
     </p>
<p>
      They could hear the crunching sound of the sand under the iron hoops of
      the wheels of the calash which had just entered the gates. Kirsha’s face
      wore a gloomy expression. It was difficult to comprehend what was in his
      soul—was it a reproach?—astonishment?—fear?
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov went to the window. A man of about forty, impressive for his
      appearance of calm and self-assurance, stepped out of the calash. Trirodov
      recognized his visitor at the first glance, though he had never met him
      before in society. He knew him well, but only from portraits he had seen
      of him, from his literary works, and from the stories of his admirers and
      articles about him. In his youth Trirodov had had some slight relations
      with him through friends, but this was interrupted. He had not even met
      him.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov suddenly felt both cheerful and sad. He reflected:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why has he come to me? What does he want of me? And why should he
      suddenly think of me? Our roads have diverged so much, we have become such
      strangers to one another.”
     </p>
<p>
      There was his disturbing curiosity:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’ll see and hear him for the first time.”
     </p>
<p>
      And the mutinous protest:
    </p>
<p>
      “His words are a lie! His preachings the ravings of despair. There was no
      miracle, there is none, and there will not be!”
     </p>
<p>
      Kirsha, very agitated, ran out of the room. The sensitive and painful
      feeling of aloneness seized Trirodov as in a sticky net, entangled his
      legs, and obstructed his glances with grey.
    </p>
<p>
      A quiet boy entered, smiling, and handed him a card, on which, under a
      princely crown, was the lithographed inscription:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  <i>Immanuel Osipovitch Davidov</i>.<a href="#linknote-36" id="linknoteref-36" name="linknoteref-36">36</a>
</pre>
<p>
      In a voice dark and deep with suppressed excitement Trirodov said to the
      boy:
    </p>
<p>
      “Ask him to come in.”
     </p>
<p>
      The provoking and unanswerable question persisted in his mind:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why, why has he come? What does he want of me?”
     </p>
<p>
      With an avidly curious glance he looked at the door, and did not take his
      eyes away. He heard the measured, unhastening footsteps, nearer and nearer—as
      if his fate were approaching.
    </p>
<p>
      The door opened, admitting the visitor—Prince Immanuel Osipovitch
      Davidov, celebrated as author and preacher, a man of a distinguished
      family and democratic views, a man beloved of many and possessed of the
      mystery of extraordinary fascination, attracting to him many hearts.
    </p>
<p>
      His face was very smooth, quite un-Russian in type. His lips, slightly
      descending at the corners, were marked with sorrow. His beard was reddish,
      short, and cut to a point. His red-gold, slightly wavy hair was cut quite
      short. This astonished Trirodov, who had always seen the Prince in
      portraits wearing his hair rather long, like the poet Nadson. His eyes
      were black, flaming and deep. Deeply hidden in his eyes was an expression
      of great weariness and suffering, which the inattentive observer might
      have interpreted as an expression of fatigued tranquillity and
      indifference. Everything about the visitor—his face and his ways—betrayed
      his habit of speaking in a large company, even in a crowd.
    </p>
<p>
      He walked up tranquilly to Trirodov and said, as he stretched out his
      hand:
    </p>
<p>
      “I wanted to see you. I have observed you for some time, and at last have
      come to you.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov, making an effort to control his agitation and his deep
      irritation, said with an affectedly amiable voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “I’m very pleased to greet you in my house. I’ve heard much about you from
      the Pirozhkovskys. Of course you know that they have a great admiration
      and affection for you.”
     </p>
<p>
      Prince Davidov looked at him piercingly but calmly, perhaps too calmly. It
      seemed strange that he answered nothing to the remark about the
      Pirozhkovskys—as if Trirodov’s words passed by him like momentary
      shadows, without so much as touching anything in his soul. On the other
      hand, the Pirozhkovskys have always talked about Prince Davidov as of an
      intimate acquaintance. “Yesterday we dined at the Prince’s”; “The Prince
      is finishing a new poem”—by simply “the Prince” they gave one to
      understand that their remark concerned their friend, Prince Davidov.
      Trirodov recalled that the Prince had many acquaintances, and that there
      were always large gatherings in his house.
    </p>
<p>
      “Permit me to offer you some refreshment,” said Trirodov. “Will you have
      wine?”
     </p>
<p>
      “I’d rather have tea, if you don’t mind,” said Prince Davidov.
    </p>
<p>
      Trirodov pressed the button of the electric bell. Prince Davidov continued
      in his tranquil, too tranquil, voice:
    </p>
<p>
      “My fiancée lives in this town. I’ve come to see her, and have taken
      advantage of this opportunity to have a chat with you. There are many
      things I should like to discuss with you but I shall not have the time. We
      must limit ourselves to the more important matters.”
     </p>
<p>
      And he began to talk, and did not wait for answers or refutations. His
      flaming speech poured itself out—about faith, miracles, about the
      likely and inevitable transfiguration of the world by means of a miracle,
      about our triumph over the fetters of time and over death itself.
    </p>
<p>
      The quiet boy Grisha brought tea and cakes, and with measured movements
      put them on the table, pausing now and then to look at the visitor with
      his blue, quiet eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      Prince Davidov looked reproachfully at Trirodov. A repressed smile
      trembled on Trirodov’s lips and an obstinate challenge gleamed in his
      eyes. The visitor affectionately drew Grisha to him and stroked him
      gently. The quiet boy stood calmly there—and Trirodov was gloomy. He
      said to his visitor: “You love children. I can understand that. They are
      angelic beings, though unbearable sometimes. It is only a pity that they
      die too often upon this accursed earth. They are born in order to die.”
     </p>
<p>
      Prince Davidov, with a tranquil movement, pushed Grisha away from him. He
      put his hand on the boy’s head as if in blessing, then suddenly became
      grave and stern, and asked quietly:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why do you do this?”
     </p>
<p>
      He asked the question with a great exertion of the will, like one who
      wished to exercise power. Trirodov smiled:
    </p>
<p>
      “You do not like it?” he asked. “Well, what of it—you with your
      extensive connexions could easily hinder me.”
     </p>
<p>
      The tone in which he uttered his words expressed proud irony. Thus Satan
      would have spoken, tempting a famished one in the desert.
    </p>
<p>
      Prince Davidov frowned. His black eyes flared up. He asked again:
    </p>
<p>
      “Why have you done all this? The body of the malefactor and the soul of an
      innocent—why should you have it all?”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov, looking angrily at his visitor, said resolutely:
    </p>
<p>
      “My design has been daring and difficult—but have I alone suffered
      from despondency, suffered until I perspired with blood? Do I alone bear
      within me a dual soul, and unite in me two worlds? Am I alone worn out by
      nightmares as heavy as the burdens of the world? Have I alone in a tragic
      moment felt myself lonely and forsaken?”
     </p>
<p>
      The visitor smiled a strange, sad, tranquil smile. Trirodov continued:
    </p>
<p>
      “You had better know that I will never be with you, that I will not accept
      your comforting theories. All your literary and preaching activity is a
      complete mistake. I don’t believe anything of what you say so eloquently,
      enticing the weak. I simply don’t believe it.”
     </p>
<p>
      The visitor was silent.
    </p>
<p>
      “Leave me alone!” said Trirodov decisively. “There is no miracle. There
      was no resurrection. No one has conquered death. The establishment of a
      single will over the inert, amorphous world is a deed not yet
      accomplished.”
     </p>
<p>
      Prince Davidov rose and said sorrowfully:
    </p>
<p>
      “I will leave you alone, if you wish it. But you will regret that you have
      rejected the path I have shown you—the only path.”
     </p>
<p>
      Trirodov said proudly:
    </p>
<p>
      “I know the true path—my path.”
     </p>
<p>
      “Good-bye,” said Prince Davidov simply and calmly.
    </p>
<p>
      He left—and in a little while it seemed that he had not been there.
      Lost in painful reflections, Trirodov did not hear the noise of the
      departing carriage; the unexpected call of the dark-faced, fascinating
      visitor, with his flaming speech and his fiery eyes, stirred his memory
      like a midday dream, like an abrupt hallucination.
    </p>
<p>
      “Who is his fiancée, and why is she here?” Trirodov asked himself.
    </p>
<p>
      A strange, impossible idea came into his head. Did not Elisaveta once
      speak about him with rapture? Perhaps the unexpected visitor would take
      Elisaveta away from him, as he had taken her from Piotr.
    </p>
<p>
      This misgiving tormented him. But Trirodov looked into the clearness of
      her eyes on the portrait taken recently and at the grace and loveliness of
      her body and suddenly consoled himself. He thought:
    </p>
<p>
      “She is mine.”
     </p>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
      But Elisaveta, musing and burning, was experiencing passionate dreams; and
      she felt the tediousness of the grey monotony of her dull life. The
      strange vision suddenly appearing to her in those terrible moments in the
      wood repeated itself persistently—and it seemed to her that it was
      not another but she herself who was experiencing a parallel life, that she
      was passing the exultantly bright, joyous, and sad way of Queen Ortruda.
    </p>
<h3>
      THE END
    </h3>
<p>
<br/><br/>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<a id="link2H_FOOT" name="link2H_FOOT"> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
<h2>
      FOOTNOTES:
    </h2>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-1" name="linknote-1"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      1 (<a href="#linknoteref-1">return</a>)<br/> [ Also the scene of Sologub’s
      “Little Demon.”]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-2" name="linknote-2"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      2 (<a href="#linknoteref-2">return</a>)<br/> [ Footpath of the dead.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-3" name="linknote-3"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      3 (<a href="#linknoteref-3">return</a>)<br/> [ This word, which is the
      Russian equivalent for <i>Ham</i> of the Bible, describes a man in a state
      of serfdom. Since the abolition of serfdom in Russia, it has come to
      define the plebeian; and is a sort of personification of the rabble. The
      satirist Stchedrin has defined <i>Kham</i> as “one who eats with a knife
      and takes milk with his after-dinner coffee.” Merezhkovsky has written a
      book on Gorky under the title of “The Future Kham.”—<i>Translator</i>.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-4" name="linknote-4"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      4 (<a href="#linknoteref-4">return</a>)<br/> [ Bossiak literally means “a
      barefooted one,” but may be more freely translated a “tramp.” This type
      has come very much into vogue since Gorky has put him into his stories.—Translator.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-5" name="linknote-5"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      5 (<a href="#linknoteref-5">return</a>)<br/> [ This phrase signifies
      punishment inflicted by the authorities without a trial.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-6" name="linknote-6"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      6 (<a href="#linknoteref-6">return</a>)<br/> [ The name by which the
      members of the Constitutional Democratic Party are known. It is a
      development of the initials “C. D.”]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-7" name="linknote-7"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      7 (<a href="#linknoteref-7">return</a>)<br/> [Reference to the identity of
      the Black Hundred.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-8" name="linknote-8"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      8 (<a href="#linknoteref-8">return</a>)<br/> [ See note on page 44.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-9" name="linknote-9"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      9 (<a href="#linknoteref-9">return</a>)<br/> [ The Black Hundred.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-10" name="linknote-10"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      10 (<a href="#linknoteref-10">return</a>)<br/> [ Betty.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-11" name="linknote-11"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      11 (<a href="#linknoteref-11">return</a>)<br/> [ Nickname for Social
      Democrats.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-12" name="linknote-12"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      12 (<a href="#linknoteref-12">return</a>)<br/> [ Nickname for Social
      Revolutionaries.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-13" name="linknote-13"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      13 (<a href="#linknoteref-13">return</a>)<br/> [ A political party of
      moderate liberals which owes its name to the fact that on October 17,
      1905, the Russian Constitution was established and the Duma organized.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-14" name="linknote-14"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      14 (<a href="#linknoteref-14">return</a>)<br/> [ Member of the Social
      Democratic Party.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-15" name="linknote-15"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      15 (<a href="#linknoteref-15">return</a>)<br/> [ See note on page 26.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-16" name="linknote-16"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      16 (<a href="#linknoteref-16">return</a>)<br/> [ See note on page 44.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-17" name="linknote-17"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      17 (<a href="#linknoteref-17">return</a>)<br/> [ Whips.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-18" name="linknote-18"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      18 (<a href="#linknoteref-18">return</a>)<br/> [ Members of the Social
      Revolutionary Party are supposed to wear black shirts, those of the Social
      Democratic Party red.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-19" name="linknote-19"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      19 (<a href="#linknoteref-19">return</a>)<br/> [ Forest fires are one of
      the numerous problems of Russia. They seem to be difficult to put out, and
      sometimes go on for weeks. Hence the numerous references in the following
      pages to the constant odour of forest flames.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-20" name="linknote-20"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      20 (<a href="#linknoteref-20">return</a>)<br/> [ These two Greek Fates are
      important and recurring symbols in Sologub’s philosophy. The world of Aisa
      is the world of chaos and chance, in which man is too often lost in trying
      to emerge from it. The people who belong to Ananke are those who, acting
      of necessity, define their world clearly and conquer chaos. Theirs is the
      immutable truth. See also Introduction.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-21" name="linknote-21"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      21 (<a href="#linknoteref-21">return</a>)<br/> [ A line from a poem by
      Pushkin.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-22" name="linknote-22"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      22 (<a href="#linknoteref-22">return</a>)<br/> [ Siberian island famous
      for its prison.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-23" name="linknote-23"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      23 (<a href="#linknoteref-23">return</a>)<br/> [ Usually brought along as
      witnesses.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-24" name="linknote-24"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      24 (<a href="#linknoteref-24">return</a>)<br/> [ I have it on the
      authority of one who was of the party that it actually took place at the
      house of a celebrated living poet in St. Petersburg. The lost cap belonged
      to Dmitry Merezhkovsky, who immediately wrote a much-discussed article in
      an important newspaper under the title of “What has become of our Cap?”
       The above is an actual quotation from it. The sarcastic remark about
      “throwing back the enemy” is aimed at those “patriots” who used to say
      that all Russians had to do to repel foreign enemies was to throw their
      caps at them.—Translator.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-25" name="linknote-25"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      25 (<a href="#linknoteref-25">return</a>)<br/> [ The second of the novels
      under the general head of “The Created Legend” deals with the previous
      existence of Elisaveta when she was the Queen Ortruda of the United Isles
      in the Mediterranean, and her consort was Prince Tancred, now Trirodov.
      She died from suffocation in a volcanic eruption, after a vain effort to
      help her people. The author draws a curious parallel, not only with regard
      to these two characters, but has also a revolution as the background; it
      is a rather veiled effort to describe over again the events which took
      place in Russia in 1905.—Translator.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-26" name="linknote-26"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      26 (<a href="#linknoteref-26">return</a>)<br/> [ Unleavened bread of the
      Passover.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-27" name="linknote-27"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      27 (<a href="#linknoteref-27">return</a>)<br/> [ In a poem in prose which
      serves as an introduction to his Complete Works, Sologub says: “Born not
      the first time, and not the first to complete a circle of external
      transformations, I simply and calmly reveal my soul. I reveal it in the
      hope <i>that the intimate part of me shall become the universal</i>.”—Translator.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-28" name="linknote-28"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      28 (<a href="#linknoteref-28">return</a>)<br/> [ Readers of “The Little
      Demon” will have no trouble in recognizing in Ardalyon Borisovitch an old
      acquaintance—Peredonov.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-29" name="linknote-29"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      29 (<a href="#linknoteref-29">return</a>)<br/> [ Diminutive for father,
      and used in the sense of “my good fellow,” etc.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-30" name="linknote-30"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      30 (<a href="#linknoteref-30">return</a>)<br/> [ “Golubushka” is “little
      dove.” English equivalent as used here: “my dear.”]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-31" name="linknote-31"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      31 (<a href="#linknoteref-31">return</a>)<br/> [ Title of standard
      didactic work by Karamzin (1766-1826).]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-32" name="linknote-32"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      32 (<a href="#linknoteref-32">return</a>)<br/> [ Mikhail Katkov
      (1820-1887), a celebrated reactionary and Slavophil.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-33" name="linknote-33"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      33 (<a href="#linknoteref-33">return</a>)<br/> [ Little Mother.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-34" name="linknote-34"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      34 (<a href="#linknoteref-34">return</a>)<br/> [ The Russo-Japanese War.]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-35" name="linknote-35"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      35 (<a href="#linknoteref-35">return</a>)<br/> [ A reference to J. M.
      Guyau’s book, “Non-Religion of the Future.”]
    </p>
<p>
<br/><a id="linknote-36" name="linknote-36"> </a>
</p>
<p class="foot">
      36 (<a href="#linknoteref-36">return</a>)<br/> [ There is an evident
      effort here to identify “Immanuel Osipovitch Davidov” as a modern symbol
      of Christ, or more properly of Christ’s teachings, “Osipovitch” means the
      “son of Joseph”; “Davidov,” “of David,”—Translator.]
    </p>
<div style="height: 6em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
