<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
			<p>The local police department was not very skilful in tracking down thieves and murderers. And it did not occupy itself much with this ungrateful business. It had other things to think of in those turbulent days. Instead, it turned its ill-disposed attention to Trirodov’s educational colony⁠—thanks to the efforts of Ostrov and his friends and patrons.</p>
			<p>The neighbourhood of Trirodov’s estate began to teem with detectives. They assumed various guises, and though they employed all their cunning to escape observation they did not succeed in fooling anyone. Of limited intelligence, they fulfilled their duties without inspiration, tediously, greyly, and dully.</p>
			<p>Soon the children learned to recognize the detectives. Even at a distance they would say at the sight of a suspicious character:</p>
			<p>“There goes a detective!”</p>
			<p>Upon seeing him again they would say:</p>
			<p>“There goes our detective!”</p>
			<p>Of the uniformed police the first to make inquiries at Trirodov’s colony was a sergeant. He was fairly drunk. It happened on the same day that Egorka returned home to his mother.</p>
			<p>The sergeant entered the outer courtyard, the gates of which happened to have been left open by chance. A strong smell of vodka came from him. With the suspicious eye of an inexperienced spy he examined the barns, the ice-cellar, and the kitchen. He wondered stupidly at the cleanliness of the yard and the tidiness of the new buildings.</p>
			<p>The sergeant was about to enter the kitchen in order to talk with someone about the business on which he had been sent, when quite suddenly he saw a young girl, one of the instructresses, Zinaida. She walked without haste in the yard, in a white-blue costume that reached to her knees. Zinaida had a cheerful, simple, sunburnt face. Her strong, bare arms swung lightly as she walked. It seemed as if the graceful girl were carried upon the earth without visible effort.</p>
			<p>The chaste openness of her chaste body naturally aroused hideous thoughts in the half-drunken idiot. And was it possible to be otherwise in our dark days? Even in the tale of a poet in love with beauty, the nudity of a chaste body calls out the judgment of hypocrites and the rage of people with perverted imaginations, as if it were the arrogant nudity of a prostitute. The austere virtue of these people is attached to them externally. It cannot withstand any kind of temptation or enticement. They know this, and cautiously guard themselves from seduction. But in secret they console their miserable imaginations with unclean pictures of back-street lewdness, cheap, and regulated, and almost undangerous for their health and the welfare of their families.</p>
			<p>The police sergeant, upon seeing the young girl, so lightly dressed, gave a lewd smile. His unclean desire stirred in his coarse body under its slovenly sweaty dress. He beckoned Zinaida to him with his crooked dirty finger and gave an idiotic laugh. He pushed his faded cap down to the back of his head.</p>
			<p>The young girl walked up to the police sergeant with a light easy gait. Thus walk queens of beloved free lands, barefoot virgins crowned with white flowers, queens of lands of which our too Parisian age does not know.</p>
			<p>The police sergeant whiffed his shag, vodka, and garlic at Zinaida, and smiling lasciviously, so that the green and the yellow of his crooked teeth showed conspicuously, he said:</p>
			<p>“Look-a-here, my pretty girl⁠—d’ye live here?”</p>
			<p>Zinaida ingenuously marvelled at his red, dirty hands, at his red, provokingly perspiring face, his big, heavy, mud-bedraggled boots, and all those external tokens of the deformity of our poor, coarse life. They so quickly became unused to this deformity here in the valley of their beloved, innocent, tranquil life.</p>
			<p>Zinaida replied with an involuntary smile:</p>
			<p>“Yes, I live here in this colony.”</p>
			<p>The police sergeant asked:</p>
			<p>“Are you the cook? Or the laundress? What a nice piece of sugar-candy you are!”</p>
			<p>He burst into a shrill, neighing laugh, and was about to begin his offensively affectionate tactics⁠—he lifted his open, tawny hand, and aimed his forefinger with a black border on a thick yellow fingernail towards a place where he might jab, pinch, or tickle the barefoot, bare-armed girl. But Zinaida, smiling and frowning at the same time, edged away from him and answered:</p>
			<p>“I’m an instructress in this school⁠—Zinaida Ouzlova.”</p>
			<p>The sergeant drawled out:</p>
			<p>“An instructress! You are fibbing!”</p>
			<p>He did not believe at first that she was an instructress. He thought that she was the cook, or the washerwoman, who had tucked up her dress in order to wash, scour, or cook more conveniently; and that she was joking with him. But after he had scrutinized her face more intently, a face such as a cook does not have, and her hands, such as a washerwoman does not have⁠—he suddenly believed.</p>
			<p>With astonishment and curiosity Zinaida eyed this strange, coarse, offensively affectionate creature with the heavy sabre in a black sheath dangling about his legs, and asked:</p>
			<p>“And who are you?”</p>
			<p>The sergeant replied with a very important air:</p>
			<p>“I am the local police sergeant.”</p>
			<p>He tried to look dignified.</p>
			<p>“What is it you want here?” asked Zinaida.</p>
			<p>The sergeant turned to her with a wink and asked:</p>
			<p>“Now tell me, my beauty, have you a runaway boy from town here? His mother is looking for him, and she’s notified the police. If he’s here with you, we’ve got to return him to town.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Zinaida. “A town boy did spend a week with us here. We sent him home only today. He’s very likely with his mother now.”</p>
			<p>The sergeant smiled incredulously, and asked:</p>
			<p>“You’re not fibbing?”</p>
			<p>Zinaida shrugged her shoulders. She looked sternly at the man, and said in astonishment:</p>
			<p>“What are you saying? How is it possible to tell an untruth? And why should I tell you an untruth?”</p>
			<p>“How is one to tell?” growled the sergeant. “Once I begin to believe you there are lots of things you might say.”</p>
			<p>“I’ve told you the truth,” asserted Zinaida once more.</p>
			<p>“Well, just be careful,” said the sergeant with dignity. “We’ll find out all the same. You are sure you’ve returned him home?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, home to his mother,” replied Zinaida.</p>
			<p>“Very well, I shall report that to the Captain of the police.” He told a lie for dignity’s sake. It was the Commissary of the police who sent him here, and not the Captain. But it was all the same to Zinaida. She had got quite accustomed to thinking mostly about the children and her work. The stern reference to the police authorities did not impress her very much.</p>
			<p>The police sergeant left. He kept up his broad smile. He looked back several times at the instructress. He was gay and flustered all the way to town. His thoughts were coarse and detestable. Such are the thoughts of the savages who take shelter in the grey expanses of our towns⁠—savages who hide under all sorts of masks, and who strut about in all sorts of clothes.</p>
			<p>Zinaida looked sadly after the police sergeant. Coarse recollections of former days revived in her soul, now full of delicious soothings of a different, blessed existence created by Trirodov in the quiet coolness of the beloved wood. Then Zinaida sighed as if awakened from a midday nightmare. She went quietly her own way.</p>
			<p>In the course of several days Trirodov’s colony was visited by the Commissary of the police. He comprehended and considered the chaste world of the Prosianiya Meadows in the same way as the illiterate sergeant. Only this consideration expressed itself in a milder form.</p>
			<p>The Commissary of the police tried to be very amiable. He paid awkward compliments to Trirodov and his instructresses. But when he looked at the instructresses the Commissary smiled as detestably as the sergeant. His small, narrow eyes, which resembled those of a Kalmyk, became oily with pleasure. His cheeks became covered with a brick-red ruddiness.</p>
			<p>When the girls walked off to one side he gave a wink at Trirodov in their direction, and said in a <i xml:lang="it">sotto voce</i>:</p>
			<p>“A flower garden, eh?”</p>
			<p>Trirodov looked severely at the Commissary, who became flustered and rather angry. He said:</p>
			<p>“I have come to you, I’m sorry to say, on unpleasant business.”</p>
			<p>Indeed, he came under the pretext of discussing the arrangements of Egorka’s position. Incidentally, he hinted that the illegal opening of Egorka’s grave might give cause to an official investigation. Trirodov gave the Commissary a bribe and treated him to lunch. The Commissary of the police left in high spirits.</p>
			<p>At last Trirodov had a visit from the Captain of the police. He had a gloomy, inaccessible look. He began quite bluntly about the illegal digging up of Egorka’s grave. Trirodov said:</p>
			<p>“Surely it was impossible to leave a live boy to suffocate in a grave.”</p>
			<p>The Captain replied in a rather austere voice:</p>
			<p>“You should have notified the Prior of the cemetery church of your suspicions. He would have done all there was to be done.”</p>
			<p>“But think how much time would have been lost in going after the priest,” said Trirodov.</p>
			<p>The Captain, without listening, replied:</p>
			<p>“It’s irregular. What would become of us if everyone should take it into his head to open up graves! A chap might do it to steal something, and when he’s caught he might say that he’s heard the corpse was alive and turning in its grave.”</p>
			<p>“You know very well,” retorted Trirodov, “that we didn’t go there with the object of robbery.”</p>
			<p>But the Captain reiterated harshly and sternly:</p>
			<p>“It’s irregular.”</p>
			<p>Trirodov invited the Captain to dinner. The Captain’s bribe was, of course, considerably larger than the Commissary’s. After a sumptuous dinner and drinks, and the bribe, the Captain suddenly became softer than wax. He began to dwell on the difficulties and annoyances of his position. Then Trirodov mentioned the search that had been made lately, and the beating the instructress Maria received at the police station. The Captain flushed with embarrassment and said with some warmth:</p>
			<p>“Upon my honour, it didn’t depend upon me. I must follow orders. Our new Vice-Governor⁠—forgive the expression⁠—is a regular butcher. That’s how he’s made his career.”</p>
			<p>“Is it possible to make one’s career by such means?” asked Trirodov.</p>
			<p>The Captain spoke animatedly⁠—and it was evident that the career of the new Vice-Governor agitated his official heart considerably.</p>
			<p>“The facts must be familiar to you,” he said. “He killed his friend when he was drunk, was confined in a lunatic asylum, and how he ever got out is beyond comprehension. With the help of patronage he was given a position in the District Government and showed himself to be such an asp that everyone marvelled. He quickly galloped into a councillorship. He subdued the peasants. Of course you must have heard about it?”</p>
			<p>“Who hasn’t heard about it?” asked Trirodov quietly.</p>
			<p>“The newspapers have certainly published enough about him,” the Captain continued. “Sometimes they added a trifle, but this was to his good. It turned everyone’s attention to him. He was made Vice-Governor, and now he has redoubled his efforts, and is trying to distinguish himself further. He has an eye on the governorship. He is sure to go a long way. Our own Governor is on his guard on his account. I need not tell you what a powerful arm our Governor has in Petersburg. Nevertheless he can’t decide to thwart Ardalyon Borisovitch.”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></p>
			<p>“And yet in spite of that you. …”</p>
			<p>“Do please consider what a time we are living in,” said the Captain. “There never was anything like it. There is such an unrest among the peasants that may God have mercy on us. Only the other day they played the deuce on Khavriukin’s farm. They carried away everything that could be carried away. The muzhiks even took away all the live stock. A pitiful case. Khavriukin is considered among the better masters in our government. He held the peasants in the palm of his hand. And now they’ve paid him back!”</p>
			<p>“Howsoever it may have happened,” said Trirodov, “still you did whip my instructress. That was rather shocking.”</p>
			<p>“Please!” exclaimed the Captain. “I will personally ask her pardon. Like an honest man.”</p>
			<p>Trirodov sent for Maria. Maria came. The Captain of the police poured out his apologies before her, and covered her sunburnt hands with kisses. Maria was silent. Her face was pale, and her eyes were aflame with anger.</p>
			<p>The Captain thought cautiously:</p>
			<p>“Such a woman would not stop at murder.”</p>
			<p>He made haste to take his leave.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
